. 

Overpopulation is a generally undesirable condition where an organism's numbers exceed the carrying capacity of its habitat. The term often refers to the relationship between the human population and its environment, the Earth,[REF] or smaller geographical areas such as countries. Overpopulation can result from an increase in births, a decline in mortality rates, an increase in immigration, or an unsustainable biome and depletion of resources. It is possible for very sparsely populated areas to be overpopulated if the area has a meager or non-existent capability to sustain life (e.g. a desert). 

The population has been growing continuously since the end of the Black Death, around the year 1400, although the most significant increase has been in the last 50 years, mainly due to medical advancements and increases in agricultural productivity. Although the rate of population growth has been declining since the 1980s, the United Nations has expressed concern on continued excessive population growth in sub-Saharan Africa [REF]. As of June 12, 2013 the world human population is estimated to be &nbsp;billion by the United States Census Bureau,[REF] and over 7 billion by the United Nations [REF]. Most estimates for the carrying capacity of the Earth are between 4 billion and 16 billion. Depending on which estimate is used, human overpopulation may or may not have already occurred. Nevertheless, the rapid recent increase in human population is causing some concern. The population is expected to reach between 8 and 10.5 billion between the year 2040[REF][REF] and 2050 [REF]. In May 2011, the United Nations increased the medium variant projections to 9.3 billion for 2050 and 10.1 billion for 2100 [REF]. 

The recent rapid increase in human population over the past two centuries has raised concerns that the planet may not be able to sustain present or larger numbers of inhabitants. Steve Jones, head of the biology department at University College London, has said, "Humans are 10,000 times more common than we should be" [REF]. The InterAcademy Panel Statement on Population Growth has stated that many environmental problems, such as rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide, global warming, and pollution, are aggravated by the population expansion [REF]. Other problems associated with overpopulation include the increased demand for resources such as fresh water and food, starvation and malnutrition, consumption of natural resources faster than the rate of regeneration (such as fossil fuels), and a decrease in living conditions. However, some believe that waste and over-consumption, especially by wealthy nations, is putting more strain on the environment than overpopulation [REF]. 

Limiting birth rates through legal regulations, educating people about family planning, increasing access to birth control and contraception, and extraterrestrial settlement have been suggested as ways to mitigate overpopulation in the future. China and other nations already have regulations limiting the birth rate, with China using the one child policy. Contraception is a response to the fact that nearly 40% of pregnancies are unintended and that in the poorest regions mothers often lack information and the means to control the size of their families.

Concern about overpopulation is relatively recent in origin. Throughout history, populations have grown slowly despite high birth rates, due to the population-reducing effects of war, plagues and high infant mortality. During the 750 years before the Industrial Revolution, the world's population increased very slowly, remaining under 250 million [REF]. 

By the beginning of the 19th century, the world population had grown to a billion individuals, and intellectuals such as Thomas Malthus and physiocratic economists predicted that mankind would outgrow its available resources, since a finite amount of land was incapable of supporting an endlessly increasing population. Mercantillists argued that a large population was a form of wealth, which made it possible to create bigger markets and armies. 

A number of eminent scientists contend that overpopulation is not a concern for the Earth. The UN Population Assessment Report of 2003 states that the world population will plateau by 2050 and will remain that way until 2300. Dr Alex Berezow states that overpopulation is not a Western world problem and people often cite China and India as major population contributors; however he notes that with rising wealth in those countries, population will begin to slow, as population growth is strongly linked to the economic stability of a country [REF].

Population[REF]
. |- Year Billion 
. |- 1804 1 
. |- 1927 2 
. |- 1959 3 
. |- 1974 4 
. |- 1987 5 
. |- 1999 6 
. |- 2011* 7 
. |- estimate 31.10.2011 . 

The human population has gone through a number of periods of growth since the dawn of civilization in the Holocene period, around 10,000 BCE. The beginning of civilization coincides with the final receding of glacial ice following the end of the last glacial period. It is estimated that about 1,000,000 people, subsisting on hunting and foraging, inhabited the Earth in the period before the neolithic revolution, when human activity shifted away from hunter-gathering and towards very primitive farming. 

Around 8000 BCE, at the dawn of agriculture, the population of the world was approximately 5 million [REF]. The next several millennia saw minimal changes in the population, with a steady growth beginning in 1000 BCE, and a peak of between 200 and 300 million people in 1 BCE. 

The Plague of Justinian caused Europe's population to drop by around 50% between 541 and the 8th century [REF]. Steady growth resumed in 800 CE [REF]. However, growth was again disrupted by frequent plagues; most notably, the Black Death during the 14th century. The effects of the Black Death are thought to have reduced the world's population, then at an estimated 450 million, to between 350 and 375 million by 1400 [REF]. The population of Europe stood at over 70 million in 1340;[REF] these levels did not return until 200 years later [REF]. England's population reached an estimated 5.6 million in 1650, up from an estimated 2.6 million in 1500 [REF]. New crops from the Americas via the Spanish colonizers in the 16th century contributed to the population growth [REF]. 

In other parts of the globe, China's population at the founding of the Ming dynasty in 1368 stood close to 60 million, approaching 150 million by the end of the dynasty in 1644 [REF]. The population of the Americas in 1500 may have been between 50 and 100 million [REF]. 

Encounters between European explorers and populations in the rest of the world often introduced local epidemics of extraordinary virulence. Archaeological evidence indicates that the death of around 90% of the Native American population of the New World was caused by Old World diseases such as smallpox, measles, and influenza [REF]. Over the centuries, the Europeans had developed high degrees of immunity to these diseases, while the indigenous peoples had no such immunity [REF]. 

After the start of the Industrial Revolution, during the 18th century, the rate of population growth began to increase. By the end of the century, the world's population was estimated at just under 1 billion [REF]. At the turn of the 20th century, the world's population was roughly 1.6 billion [REF]. By 1940, this figure had increased to 2.3 billion [REF].

Population growth 1990–2009 (%)[REF]
. |- World 28.4%
. |- Africa 58.4%
. |- Middle East 53.4%
. |- Asia 36.9%
. |- Latin America 32.0%
. |- OECD North America 25.1%
. |- OECD Europe 9.9%
. |- OECD Pacific 9.5%
. |- Non-OECD Europe and Eurasia -2.7% Dramatic growth beginning in 1950 (above 1.8% per year) coincided with greatly increased food production as a result of the industrialisation of agriculture brought about by the Green Revolution [REF]. The rate of human population growth peaked in 1964, at about 2.2% per year. For example, Indonesia's population grew from 97 million in 1961 to 237.6 million in 2010,[REF][REF] a 145% increase in 49 years. In India, the population grew from 361.1 million people in 1951 to just over 1.2 billion by 2011,[REF][REF] a 235% increase in 60 years. 

Some people are concerned that the recent sharp population rises in many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, South Asia and South East Asia is creating problems such as increased demand for resources, especially for the less fortunate countries. The population of Chad has, for example, ultimately grown from 6,279,921 in 1993 to 10,329,208 in 2009 [REF]. Vietnam, Mexico, Nigeria, Egypt, Ethiopia and the DRC are witnessing a similar growth in population. The situation is most acute in northern, western and central Africa. Refugees from places like Sudan have further strained the resources of neighbouring states like Chad and Egypt. The nation is also host to roughly 255,000 refugees from Sudan’s Darfur region, and about 77,000 refugees from the Central African Republic, whilst approximately 188,000 Chadians have been displaced by their own civil war and famines, have either fled to either the Sudan, the Niger or, more recently, Libya.

Continent Projected 2050 population[REF]
. |- Africa 1.9 billion 
. |- Asia 5.2 billion 
. |- Europe 674 million 
. |- Latin America and Caribbean 765 million 
. |- North America 448 million According to projections, the world population will continue to grow until at least 2050, with the population reaching 9 billion in 2040,[REF][REF] and some predictions putting the population in 2050 as high as 11 billion [REF]. Walter Greiling projected in the 1950s that world population would reach a peak of about nine billion, in the 21st century, and then stop growing, after a readjustment of the Third World and a sanitation of the tropics [REF]. Recent extrapolations from available figures for population growth show that the population of Earth will stop increasing around 2070 [REF]. 

According to the United Nations' World Population Prospects report:[REF] . 

The world population is currently growing by approximately 74 million people per year. Current United Nations predictions estimate that the world population will reach 9.0 billion around 2050, assuming a decrease in average fertility rate from 2.5 down to 2.0 [REF].
Almost all growth will take place in the less developed regions, where today's 5.3 billion population of underdeveloped countries is expected to increase to 7.8 billion in 2050. By contrast, the population of the more developed regions will remain mostly unchanged, at 1.2 billion. An exception is the United States population, which is expected to increase by 44% from 2008 to 2050 [REF].
In 2000–2005, the average world fertility was 2.65 children per woman, about half the level in 1950–1955 (5 children per woman). In the medium variant, global fertility is projected to decline further to 2.05 children per woman. 
During 2005–2050, nine countries are expected to account for half of the world's projected population increase: India, Pakistan, Nigeria, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Bangladesh, Uganda, United States, Ethiopia, and China, listed according to the size of their contribution to population growth. China would be higher still in this list were it not for its one-child policy. 
Global life expectancy at birth is expected to continue rising from 65 years in 2000–2005 to 75 years in 2045–2050. In the more developed regions, the projection is to 82 years by 2050. Among the least developed countries, where life expectancy today is just under 50 years, it is expected to increase to 66 years by 2045–2050. 
The population of 51 countries or areas is expected to be lower in 2050 than in 2005. 
During 2005–2050, the net number of international migrants to more developed regions is projected to be 98 million. Because deaths are projected to exceed births in the more developed regions by 73 million during 2005–2050, population growth in those regions will largely be due to international migration. 
In 2000–2005, net migration in 28 countries either prevented population decline or doubled at least the contribution of natural increase (births minus deaths) to population growth [REF].
Birth rates are now falling in a small percentage of developing countries, while the actual populations in many developed countries would fall without immigration [REF].

The theory of demographic transition held that, after the standard of living and life expectancy increase, family sizes and birth rates decline. However, as new data has become available, it has been observed that after a certain level of development the fertility increases again [REF]. This means that both the worry the theory generated about aging populations and the complacency it bred regarding the future environmental impact of population growth are misguided. 

Factors cited in the old theory included such social factors as later ages of marriage, the growing desire of many women in such settings to seek careers outside child rearing and domestic work, and the decreased need of children in industrialized settings. The latter factor stems from the fact that children perform a great deal of work in small-scale agricultural societies, and work less in industrial ones; it has been cited to explain the decline in birth rates in industrializing regions. 

Another version of demographic transition is proposed by anthropologist Virginia Abernethy in her book Population Politics, where she claims that the demographic transition occurs primarily in nations where women enjoy a special status (see Fertility-opportunity theory). In strongly patriarchal nations, where she claims women enjoy few special rights, a high standard of living tends to result in population growth. 

Many countries have high population growth rates but lower total fertility rates because high population growth in the past skewed the age demographic toward a young age, so the population still rises as the more numerous younger generation approaches maturity. 

"Demographic entrapment" is a concept developed by Maurice King, Honorary Research Fellow at the University of Leeds, who posits that this phenomenon occurs when a country has a population larger than its carrying capacity, no possibility of migration, and exports too little to be able to import food. This will cause starvation. He claims that for example many sub-Saharan nations are or will become stuck in demographic entrapment, instead of having a demographic transition [REF]. 

For the world as a whole, the number of children born per woman decreased from 5.02 to 2.65 between 1950 and 2005. A breakdown by region is as follows: . 

Europe – 2.66 to 1.41 
North America – 3.47 to 1.99 
Oceania – 3.87 to 2.30 
Central America – 6.38 to 2.66 
South America – 5.75 to 2.49 
Asia (excluding Middle East) – 5.85 to 2.43 
Middle East &#38; North Africa – 6.99 to 3.37 
Sub-Saharan Africa – 6.7 to 5.53 . 

Excluding the observed reversal in fertility decrease for high development, the projected world number of children born per woman for 2050 would be around 2.05. Only the Middle East & North Africa (2.09) and Sub-Saharan Africa (2.61) would then have numbers greater than 2.05 [REF].

There is wide variability both in the definition and in the proposed size of the Earth's carrying capacity, with estimates ranging from less than 1 to 1000 billion humans (1 trillion) [REF]. Around two-thirds of the estimates fall in the range of 4 billion to 16 billion (with unspecified standard errors), with a median of about 10 billion [REF]. 

In a study titled Food, Land, Population and the U.S. Economy, David Pimentel, professor of ecology and agriculture at Cornell University, and Mario Giampietro, senior researcher at the US National Research Institute on Food and Nutrition (INRAN), estimate the maximum U.S. population for a sustainable economy at 200 million. And in order to achieve a sustainable economy and avert disaster, the United States would have to reduce its population by at least one-third, and world population would have to be reduced by two-thirds [REF]. 

Some groups (for example, the World Wide Fund for Nature[REF][REF] and Global Footprint Network[REF]) have stated that the carrying capacity for the human population has been exceeded as measured using the Ecological Footprint. In 2006, WWF's "Living Planet Report" stated that in order for all humans to live with the current consumption patterns of Europeans, we would be spending three times more than what the planet can renew [REF]. Humanity as a whole was using, by 2006, 40 percent more than what Earth can regenerate [REF]. 

But critics question the simplifications and statistical methods used in calculating Ecological Footprints. Therefore Global Footprint Network and its partner organizations have engaged with national governments and international agencies to test the results – reviews have been produced by France, Germany, the European Commission, Switzerland, Luxembourg, Japan and the United Arab Emirates [REF]. Some point out that a more refined method of assessing Ecological Footprint is to designate sustainable versus non-sustainable categories of consumption [REF]. However, if yield estimates were adjusted for sustainable levels of production, the yield figures would be lower, and hence the overshoot estimated by the Ecological Footprint method even higher.

Overpopulation does not depend only on the size or density of the population, but on the ratio of population to available sustainable resources. It also depends on the way resources are used and distributed throughout the population. 

The resources to be considered when evaluating whether an ecological niche is overpopulated include clean water, clean air, food, shelter, warmth, and other resources necessary to sustain life. If the quality of human life is addressed, there may be additional resources considered, such as medical care, education, proper sewage treatment, waste disposal and energy supplies. Overpopulation places competitive stress on the basic life sustaining resources,[REF] leading to a diminished quality of life [REF]. 

David Pimentel,[REF] Professor Emeritus at Cornell University, has stated that "With the imbalance growing between population numbers and vital life sustaining resources, humans must actively conserve cropland, freshwater, energy, and biological resources. There is a need to develop renewable energy resources. Humans everywhere must understand that rapid population growth damages the Earth's resources and diminishes human well-being."[REF][REF] . 

These reflect the comments also of the United States Geological Survey in their paper [REF]. "As the global population continues to grow..people will place greater and greater demands on the resources of our planet, including mineral and energy resources, open space, water, and plant and animal resources." "Earth's natural wealth: an audit" by New Scientist magazine states that many of the minerals that we use for a variety of products are in danger of running out in the near future. A handful of geologists around the world have calculated the costs of new technologies in terms of the materials they use and the implications of their spreading to the developing world. All agree that the planet's booming population and rising standards of living are set to put unprecedented demands on the materials that only Earth itself can provide. Limitations on how much of these materials is available could even mean that some technologies are not worth pursuing long term.. "Virgin stocks of several metals appear inadequate to sustain the modern 'developed world' quality of life for all of Earth's people under contemporary technology" [REF]. 

On the other hand, some researchers, such as Julian Simon and Bjorn Lomborg believe that resources exist for further population growth. In a 2010 study, they concluded that "there are not (and will never be) too many people for the planet to feed" according to The Independent [REF]. Some critics warn, this will be at a high cost to the Earth: "the technological optimists are probably correct in claiming that overall world food production can be increased substantially over the next few decades..[however] the environmental cost of what Paul R. and Anne H. Ehrlich describe as 'turning the Earth into a giant human feedlot' could be severe. A large expansion of agriculture to provide growing populations with improved diets is likely to lead to further deforestation, loss of species, soil erosion, and pollution from pesticides and fertilizer runoff as farming intensifies and new land is brought into production."[REF] Since we are intimately dependent upon the living systems of the Earth,[REF][REF][REF] some scientists have questioned the wisdom of further expansion [REF]. 

According to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, a four-year research effort by 1,360 of the world's leading scientists commissioned to measure the actual value of natural resources to humans and the world, "The structure of the world's ecosystems changed more rapidly in the second half of the twentieth century than at any time in recorded human history, and virtually all of Earth's ecosystems have now been significantly transformed through human actions."[REF] "Ecosystem services, particularly food production, timber and fisheries, are important for employment and economic activity. Intensive use of ecosystems often produces the greatest short-term advantage, but excessive and unsustainable use can lead to losses in the long term. A country could cut its forests and deplete its fisheries, and this would show only as a positive gain to GDP, despite the loss of capital assets. If the full economic value of ecosystems were taken into account in decision-making, their degradation could be significantly slowed down or even reversed."[REF][REF] . 

Another study by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) called the Global Environment Outlook[REF] which involved 1,400 scientists and took five years to prepare comes to similar conclusions. It "found that human consumption had far outstripped available resources. Each person on Earth now requires a third more land to supply his or her needs than the planet can supply." It faults a failure to "respond to or recognise the magnitude of the challenges facing the people and the environment of the planet.. 'The systematic destruction of the Earth's natural and nature-based resources has reached a point where the economic viability of economies is being challenged – and where the bill we hand to our children may prove impossible to pay'.. The report's authors say its objective is 'not to present a dark and gloomy scenario, but an urgent call to action'. It warns that tackling the problems may affect the vested interests of powerful groups, and that the environment must be moved to the core of decision-making.. '[REF] . 

Although all resources, whether mineral or other, are limited on the planet, there is a degree of self-correction whenever a scarcity or high-demand for a particular kind is experienced. For example in 1990 known reserves of many natural resources were higher, and their prices lower, than in 1970, despite higher demand and higher consumption. Whenever a price spike would occur, the market tended to correct itself whether by substituting an equivalent resource or switching to a new technology [REF].

Fresh water supplies, on which agriculture depends, are running low worldwide [REF]. This water crisis is only expected to worsen as the population increases [REF]. 

Potential problems with dependence on desalination are reviewed below, however, the majority of the world's freshwater supply is contained in the polar icecaps, and underground river systems accessible through springs and wells. 

Fresh water can be obtained from salt water by desalination. For example, Malta derives two thirds of its freshwater by desalination. A number of nuclear powered desalination plants exist;[REF][REF] However, the high costs of desalination, especially for poor countries, make impractical the transport of large amounts of desalinated seawater to interiors of large countries [REF]. The cost of desalinization varies; Israel is now desalinating water for a cost of 53 cents per cubic meter,[REF] Singapore at 49 cents per cubic meter [REF]. In the United States, the cost is 81 cents per cubic meter ($3.06 for 1,000 gallons) [REF]. 

According to a 2004 study by Zhoua and Tolb, "one needs to lift the water by 2000 m, or transport it over more than 1600&nbsp;km to get transport costs equal to the desalination costs. Desalinated water is expensive in places that are both somewhat far from the sea and somewhat high, such as Riyadh and Harare. In other places, the dominant cost is desalination, not transport. This leads to somewhat lower costs in places like Beijing, Bangkok, Zaragoza, Phoenix, and, of course, coastal cities like Tripoli." Thus while the study is generally positive about the technology for affluent areas that are proximate to oceans, it concludes that "Desalinated water may be a solution for some water-stress regions, but not for places that are poor, deep in the interior of a continent, or at high elevation. Unfortunately, that includes some of the places with biggest water problems."[REF] Another potential problem with desalination is the byproduction of saline brine, which can be a major cause of marine pollution when dumped back into the oceans at high temperatures."[REF] . 

The world's largest desalination plant is the Jebel Ali Desalination Plant (Phase 2) in the United Arab Emirates, which can produce 300 million cubic meters of water per year,[REF] or about 2500 gallons per second. The largest desalination plant in the US is the one at Tampa Bay, Florida, which began desalinizing 25 million gallons (95000 m³) of water per day in December 2007 [REF]. A 17 January 2008, article in the Wall Street Journal states, "Worldwide, 13,080 desalination plants produce more than 12 billion gallons of water a day, according to the International Desalination Association."[REF] After being desalinized at Jubail, Saudi Arabia, water is pumped inland though a pipeline to the capital city of Riyadh [REF]. 

However, new data originating from the GRACE experiments and isotopic testing done by the IAEA show that the Nubian aquifer--which is under the largest, driest part of the earth's surface, has enough water in it to provide for "at least several centuries". In addition to this, new and highly detailed maps of the earth’s underground reservoirs will be soon created from these technologies that will further allow proper budgeting of cheap water [REF].

Some scientists argue that there is enough food to support the world population,[REF][REF] but critics dispute this, particularly if sustainability is taken into account [REF]. 

However, many countries rely heavily on imports. Egypt and Iran rely on imports for 40% of their grain supply. Yemen and Israel import more than 90%. And just 6 countries – Argentina, Australia, Canada, France, Thailand and the USA – supply 90% of grain exports. In recent decades the US alone supplied almost half of world grain exports [REF]. 

A 2001 United Nations report says population growth is "the main force driving increases in agricultural demand" but "most recent expert assessments are cautiously optimistic about the ability of global food production to keep up with demand for the foreseeable future (that is to say, until approximately 2030 or 2050)", assuming declining population growth rates [REF]. 

However, the observed figures for 2007 show an actual increase in absolute numbers of undernourished people in the world, 923 million in 2007 versus 832 million in 1995.;[REF] the more recent FAO estimates point to an even more dramatic increase, to 1.02 billion in 2009 [REF].

The amounts of natural resources in this context are not necessarily fixed, and their distribution is not necessarily a zero-sum game. For example, due to the Green Revolution and the fact that more and more land is appropriated each year from wild lands for agricultural purposes, the worldwide production of food had steadily increased up until 1995. World food production per person was considerably higher in 2005 than 1961 [REF]. 

As world population doubled from 3 billion to 6 billion, daily Calorie consumption in poor countries increased from 1,932 to 2,650, and the percentage of people in those countries who were malnourished fell from 45% to 18%. This suggests that Third World poverty and famine are caused by underdevelopment, not overpopulation [REF]. However, others question these statistics [REF]. From 1950 to 1984, as the Green Revolution transformed agriculture around the world, grain production increased by over 250% [REF]. The world population has grown by about four billion since the beginning of the Green Revolution and most believe that, without the Revolution, there would be greater famine and malnutrition than the UN presently documents [REF]. 

The number of people who are overweight has surpassed the number who are undernourished. In a 2006 news story, MSNBC reported, "There are an estimated 800 million undernourished people and more than a billion considered overweight worldwide." The U.S. has one of the highest rates of obesity in the world [REF].

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations states in its report The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2006, that while the number of undernourished people in the developing countries has declined by about three million, a smaller proportion of the populations of developing countries is undernourished today than in 1990–92: 17% against 20%. Furthermore, FAO's projections suggest that the proportion of hungry people in developing countries could be halved from 1990–92 levels to 10% by 2015. The FAO also states "We have emphasized first and foremost that reducing hunger is no longer a question of means in the hands of the global community. The world is richer today than it was ten years ago. There is more food available and still more could be produced without excessive upward pressure on prices. The knowledge and resources to reduce hunger are there. What is lacking is sufficient political will to mobilize those resources to the benefit of the hungry."[REF] . 

As of 2008, the price of grain has increased due to more farming used in biofuels,[REF] world oil prices at over $100 a barrel,[REF] global population growth,[REF] climate change,[REF] loss of agricultural land to residential and industrial development,[REF][REF] and growing consumer demand in China and India[REF][REF] Food riots have recently taken place in many countries across the world [REF]. An epidemic of stem rust on wheat caused by race Ug99 is currently spreading across Africa and into Asia and is causing major concern. A virulent wheat disease could destroy most of the world's main wheat crops, leaving millions to starve. The fungus has spread from Africa to Iran, and may already be in Afghanistan and Pakistan [REF]. 

It is becoming increasingly difficult to maintain food security in a world beset by a confluence of "peak" phenomena, namely peak oil, peak water, peak phosphorus, peak grain and peak fish. Growing populations, falling energy sources and food shortages will create the "perfect storm" by 2030, according to the UK government chief scientist. He said food reserves are at a 50-year low but the world requires 50% more energy, food and water by 2030 [REF]. The world will have to produce 70% more food by 2050 to feed a projected extra 2.3 billion people, the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) warned [REF].

In Africa, if current trends of soil degradation and population growth continue, the continent might be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to UNU's Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa [REF]. 

Hunger and malnutrition kill nearly 6 million children a year, and more people are malnourished in sub-Saharan Africa this decade than in the 1990s, according to a report released by the Food and Agriculture Organization. In sub-Saharan Africa, the number of malnourished people grew to 203.5 million people in 2000–02 from 170.4 million 10 years earlier says The State of Food Insecurity in the World report. In 2001, 46.4% of people in sub-Saharan Africa were living in extreme poverty [REF].

According to a 2004 article from the BBC, China, the world's most populous country, suffers from an "obesity surge". The article stated that, "Altogether, around 200 million people are thought to be overweight, 22.8% of the population, and 60 million (7.1%) obese" [REF]. More recent data indicate China's grain production peaked in the mid 1990s, due to overextraction of groundwater in the North China plain [REF].

Nearly half of India's children are malnourished, according to recent government data [REF]. Japan may face a food crisis that could reduce daily diets to the austere meals of the 1950s, believes a senior government adviser [REF].

Thinkers such as David Pimentel,[REF] a professor from Cornell University, Virginia Abernethy,[REF] Alan Thornhill,[REF] Russell Hopffenberg[REF] and author Daniel Quinn[REF] propose that like all other animals, human populations predictably grow and shrink according to their available food supply – populations grow in an abundance of food, and shrink in times of scarcity. 

Proponents of this theory argue that every time food production is increased, the population grows. Some human populations throughout history support this theory. Populations of hunter-gatherers fluctuate in accordance with the amount of available food. Population increased after the Neolithic Revolution and an increased food supply. This was followed by subsequent population growth after subsequent agricultural revolutions. 

Critics of this idea point out that birth rates are lowest in the developed nations, which also have the highest access to food. In fact, some developed countries have both a diminishing population and an abundant food supply. The United Nations projects that the population of 51 countries or areas, including Germany, Italy, Japan and most of the states of the former Soviet Union, is expected to be lower in 2050 than in 2005 [REF]. This shows that when one limits their scope to the population living within a given political boundary, human populations do not always grow to match the available food supply. Additionally, many of these countries are major exporters of food. 

Nevertheless, on the global scale the world population is increasing,[REF] as is the net quantity of human food produced – a pattern that has been true for roughly 10,000 years, since the human development of agriculture. That some countries demonstrate negative population growth fails to discredit the theory. Food moves across borders from areas of abundance to areas of scarcity. Additionally, this hypothesis is not so simplistic as to be rejected by a single case study, as in Germany's recent population trends – clearly other factors are at work: contraceptive access, cultural norms and most importantly economic realities differ from nation to nation.

Water deficits, which are already spurring heavy grain imports in numerous smaller countries, may soon do the same in larger countries, such as China or India, if technology is not used [REF]. The water tables are falling in scores of countries (including Northern China, the US, and India) owing to widespread overdrafting beyond sustainable yields. Other countries affected include Pakistan, Iran, and Mexico. This overdrafting is already leading to water scarcity and cutbacks in grain harvest. Even with the overpumping of its aquifers, China has developed a grain deficit. This effect has contributed in driving grain prices upward. Most of the 3 billion people projected to be added worldwide by mid-century will be born in countries already experiencing water shortages. One suggested solution is for population growth to be slowed quickly by investing heavily in female literacy and family planning services [REF]. Desalination is also considered a viable and effective solution to the problem of water shortages [REF]. 

After China and India, there is a second tier of smaller countries with large water deficits – Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Mexico, and Pakistan. Four of these already import a large share of their grain. Only Pakistan remains self-sufficient. But with a population expanding by 4 million a year, it will also soon turn to the world market for grain [REF].

The World Resources Institute states that "Agricultural conversion to croplands and managed pastures has affected some 3.3 billion [hectares] – roughly 26 percent of the land area. All totaled, agriculture has displaced one-third of temperate and tropical forests and one-quarter of natural grasslands."[REF][REF] Forty percent of the land area is under conversion and fragmented; less than one quarter, primarily in the Arctic and the deserts, remains intact [REF]. Usable land may become less useful through salinization, deforestation, desertification, erosion, and urban sprawl. Global warming may cause flooding of many of the most productive agricultural areas [REF]. The development of energy sources may also require large areas, for example, the building of hydroelectric dams. Thus, available useful land may become a limiting factor. By most estimates, at least half of cultivable land is already being farmed, and there are concerns that the remaining reserves are greatly overestimated [REF]. 

High crop yield vegetables like potatoes and lettuce use less space on inedible plant parts, like stalks, husks, vines, and inedible leaves. New varieties of selectively bred and hybrid plants have larger edible parts (fruit, vegetable, grain) and smaller inedible parts; however, many of these gain of agricultural technology are now historic, and new advances are more difficult to achieve. With new technologies, it is possible to grow crops on some marginal land under certain conditions. Aquaculture could theoretically increase available area. Hydroponics and food from bacteria and fungi, like quorn, may allow the growing of food without having to consider land quality, climate, or even available sunlight, although such a process may be very energy-intensive. Some argue that not all arable land will remain productive if used for agriculture because some marginal land can only be made to produce food by unsustainable practices like slash-and-burn agriculture. Even with the modern techniques of agriculture, the sustainability of production is in question. 

Some countries, such as the United Arab Emirates and particularly the Emirate of Dubai have constructed large artificial islands, or have created large dam and dike systems, like the Netherlands, which reclaim land from the sea to increase their total land area [REF]. Some scientists have said that in the future, densely populated cities will use vertical farming to grow food inside skyscrapers [REF]. The notion that space is limited has been decried by skeptics, who point out that the Earth's population of roughly 6.8 billion people could comfortably inhabit an area comparable in size to the state of Texas, in the United States (about ) [REF]. However, the impact of humanity extends over a far greater area than that required simply for habitation.

Population optimists have been criticized for failing to take into account the depletion of the petroleum required for the production of fertilizers and fuel for transportation, as well as other fossil fuels [REF]. In his 1992 book Earth in the Balance, Al Gore wrote, ".. it ought to be possible to establish a coordinated global program to accomplish the strategic goal of completely eliminating the internal combustion engine over, say, a twenty-five-year period.."[REF] Approximately half of the oil produced in the United States is refined into gasoline for use in internal combustion engines [REF]. 

Optimists counter that fossil fuels will be sufficient until the development and implementation of suitable replacement technologies—such as hydrogen or other sources of renewable energy—occurs [REF]. Methods of manufacturing fertilizers from garbage, sewage, and agricultural waste by using thermal depolymerization have been discovered [REF].

The United Nations indicates that about 850 million people are malnourished or starving,[REF] and 1.1 billion people do not have access to safe drinking water [REF]. Some argue that Earth may support 6 billion people, but only if many live in misery. The proportion of the world's population living on less than $1 per day has halved in 20 years, but these are inflation-unadjusted numbers and likely misleading [REF]. 

The UN Human Development Report of 1997 states: "During the last 15–20 years, more than 100 developing countries, and several Eastern European countries, have suffered from disastrous growth failures. The reductions in standard of living have been deeper and more long-lasting than what was seen in the industrialised countries during the depression in the 1930s. As a result, the income for more than one billion people has fallen below the level that was reached 10, 20 or 30 years ago". Similarly, although the proportion of "starving" people in sub-Saharan Africa has decreased, the absolute number of starving people has increased due to population growth. The percentage dropped from 38% in 1970 to 33% in 1996 and was expected to be 30% by 2010 [REF]. But the region's population roughly doubled between 1970 and 1996. To keep the numbers of starving constant, the percentage would have dropped by more than half [REF]. 

As of 2004, there were 108 countries in the world with more than five million people. All of these in which women have, on the average, more than 4 children in their lifetime, have a per capita GDP of less than $5000. Only in two countries with per capita GDP above ~$15,000 do women have, on the average, more than 2 children in their lifetime: these are Israel and Saudi Arabia, with average lifetime births per woman between 2 and 4. 

As their income increases, women are liberated and tend to have fewer "quantity kids", as in two in place of six [REF]. 

The correlation does not imply cause and effect, and can be linked to the interplay of birth rates, death rates and economic development.

Overpopulation has substantially adversely impacted the environment of Earth starting at least as early as the 20th century [REF]. There are also economic consequences of this environmental degradation in the form of ecosystem services attrition [REF]. Beyond the scientifically verifiable harm to the environment, some assert the moral right of other species to simply exist rather than become extinct. Environmental author Jeremy Rifkin has said that "our burgeoning population and urban way of life have been purchased at the expense of vast ecosystems and habitats.. It's no accident that as we celebrate the urbanization of the world, we are quickly approaching another historic watershed: the disappearance of the wild."[REF] . 

Says Peter Raven, former President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in their seminal work [REF], "Where do we stand in our efforts to achieve a sustainable world? Clearly, the past half century has been a traumatic one, as the collective impact of human numbers, affluence (consumption per individual) and our choices of technology continue to exploit rapidly an increasing proportion of the world's resources at an unsustainable rate.. During a remarkably short period of time, we have lost a quarter of the world's topsoil and a fifth of its agricultural land, altered the composition of the atmosphere profoundly, and destroyed a major proportion of our forests and other natural habitats without replacing them. Worst of all, we have driven the rate of biological extinction, the permanent loss of species, up several hundred times beyond its historical levels, and are threatened with the loss of a majority of all species by the end of the 21st century." . 

Further, even in countries which have both large population growth and major ecological problems, it is not necessarily true that curbing the population growth will make a major contribution towards resolving all environmental problems [REF]. However, as developing countries with high populations become more industrialized, pollution and consumption will invariably increase. 

The Worldwatch Institute said the booming economies of China and India are planetary powers that are shaping the global biosphere. The report states: . 

The world's ecological capacity is simply insufficient to satisfy the ambitions of China, India, Japan, Europe and the United States as well as the aspirations of the rest of the world in a sustainable way[REF] . 

It said that if China and India were to consume as much resources per capita as United States or Japan in 2030 together they would require a full planet Earth to meet their needs [REF]. In the longterm these effects can lead to increased conflict over dwindling resources[REF] and in the worst case a Malthusian catastrophe. 

Many studies link population growth with emissions and the effect of climate change [REF].

In 1800 only 3% of the world's population lived in cities. By the 20th century's close, 47% did so. In 1950, there were 83 cities with populations exceeding one million; but by 2007, this had risen to 468 agglomerations of more than one million [REF]. If the trend continues, the world's urban population will double every 38 years, according to researchers. The UN forecasts that today's urban population of 3.2 billion will rise to nearly 5 billion by 2030, when three out of five people will live in cities [REF]. 

The increase will be most dramatic in the poorest and least-urbanised continents, Asia and Africa. Projections indicate that most urban growth over the next 25 years will be in developing countries [REF]. One billion people, one-sixth of the world's population, or one-third of urban population, now live in shanty towns,[REF] which are seen as "breeding grounds" for social problems such as crime, drug addiction , alcoholism, poverty and unemployment. In many poor countries, slums exhibit high rates of disease due to unsanitary conditions, malnutrition, and lack of basic health care [REF]. 

In 2000, there were 18 megacities—conurbations such as Tokyo, Seoul, Mexico City, Mumbai, São Paulo and New York City – that have populations in excess of 10 million inhabitants. Greater Tokyo already has 35 million, more than the entire population of Canada (at 34.1 million) [REF]. 

By 2025, according to the Far Eastern Economic Review, Asia alone will have at least 10 hypercities, those with 20 million or more, including Jakarta (24.9 million people), Dhaka (25 million), Karachi (26.5 million), Shanghai (27 million) and Mumbai (33 million) [REF]. Lagos has grown from 300,000 in 1950 to an estimated 15 million today, and the Nigerian government estimates that city will have expanded to 25 million residents by 2015 [REF]. Chinese experts forecast that Chinese cities will contain 800 million people by 2020 [REF]. 

Despite the increase in population density within cities (and the emergence of megacities), UN Habitat states in its reports that urbanization may be the best compromise in the face of global population growth [REF]. Cities concentrate human activity within limited areas, limiting the breadth of environmental damage [REF]. But this mitigating influence can only be achieved if urban planning is significantly improved[REF] and city services are properly maintained.

Some problems associated with or exacerbated by human overpopulation:

Inadequate fresh water[REF] for drinking water use as well as sewage treatment and effluent discharge. Some countries, like Saudi Arabia, use energy-expensive desalination to solve the problem of water shortages [REF].
Depletion of natural resources, especially fossil fuels [REF].
Increased levels of air pollution, water pollution, soil contamination and noise pollution. Once a country has industrialized and become wealthy, a combination of government regulation and technological innovation causes pollution to decline substantially, even as the population continues to grow [REF].
Deforestation and loss of ecosystems[REF] that sustain global atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide balance; about eight million hectares of forest are lost each year [REF].
Changes in atmospheric composition and consequent global warming [REF].
Irreversible loss of arable land and increases in desertification [REF]. Deforestation and desertification can be reversed by adopting property rights, and this policy is successful even while the human population continues to grow [REF].
Mass species extinctions[REF] from reduced habitat in tropical forests due to slash-and-burn techniques that sometimes are practiced by shifting cultivators, especially in countries with rapidly expanding rural populations; present extinction rates may be as high as 140,000 species lost per year [REF]. As of February 2011, the IUCN Red List lists a total of 801 animal species having gone extinct during recorded human history [REF].
High infant and child mortality [REF]. High rates of infant mortality are caused by poverty. Rich countries with high population densities have low rates of infant mortality [REF].
Intensive factory farming to support large populations. It results in human threats including the evolution and spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria diseases, excessive air and water pollution, and new viruses that infect humans. 
Increased chance of the emergence of new epidemics and pandemics [REF]. For many environmental and social reasons, including overcrowded living conditions, malnutrition and inadequate, inaccessible, or non-existent health care, the poor are more likely to be exposed to infectious diseases [REF].
Starvation, malnutrition[REF] or poor diet with ill health and diet-deficiency diseases (e.g. rickets). However, rich countries with high population densities do not have famine [REF].
Poverty coupled with inflation in some regions and a resulting low level of capital formation. Poverty and inflation are aggravated by bad government and bad economic policies. Many countries with high population densities have eliminated absolute poverty and keep their inflation rates very low [REF].
Low life expectancy in countries with fastest growing populations [REF].
Unhygienic living conditions for many based upon water resource depletion, discharge of raw sewage[REF] and solid waste disposal. However, this problem can be reduced with the adoption of sewers. For example, after Karachi, Pakistan installed sewers, its infant mortality rate fell substantially [REF].
Elevated crime rate due to drug cartels and increased theft by people stealing resources to survive [REF].
Conflict over scarce resources and crowding, leading to increased levels of warfare [REF].
Less personal freedom and more restrictive laws. Laws regulate interactions between humans. Law "serves as a primary social mediator of relations between people." The higher the population density, the more frequent such interactions become, and thus there develops a need for more laws and/or more restrictive laws to regulate these interactions. It was even speculated by Aldous Huxley in 1958 that democracy is threatened due to overpopulation, and could give rise to totalitarian style governments [REF]. 

Many of these problems are addressed in the science fiction film Soylent Green. 

Some economists, such as Thomas Sowell[REF] and Walter E. Williams[REF] argue that third world poverty and famine are caused in part by bad government and bad economic policies. Most biologists and sociologists see overpopulation as a serious threat to the quality of human life [REF].

The hypothesis that population pressure causes increased warfare (youth bulge theory) has been recently criticized on the empirical grounds. Both studies focusing on specific historical societies and analyses of cross-cultural data have failed to find positive correlation between population density and incidence of warfare. Andrey Korotayev, in collaboration with Peter Turchin, has shown that such negative results do not falsify the population-warfare hypothesis [REF]. Population and warfare are dynamical variables, and if their interaction causes sustained oscillations, then we do not in general expect to find strong correlation between the two variables measured at the same time (that is, unlagged). Korotayev and Turchin have explored mathematically what the dynamical patterns of interaction between population and warfare (focusing on internal warfare) might be in both stateless and state societies. Next, they have tested the model predictions in several empirical case studies: early modern England, Han and Tang China, and the Roman Empire. Their empirical results have supported the population-warfare theory: Korotayev and Turchin have found that there is a tendency for population numbers and internal warfare intensity to oscillate with the same period but shifted in phase (with warfare peaks following population peaks). Furthermore, they have demonstrated that in the agrarian societies the rates of change of the two variables behave precisely as predicted by the theory: population rate of change is negatively affected by warfare intensity, while warfare rate of change is positively affected by population density [REF].

There are several mitigation measures that have been or can be applied to reduce the adverse impacts of overpopulation. All of these mitigations are ways to implement social norms. Overpopulation is an issue that threatens the state of the environment in the above-mentioned ways and therefore societies must make a change in order to reverse some of the environmental effects brought on by current social norms. In societies like China, the government has put policies in place that regulate the number of children allowed to a couple. Other societies have already begun to implement social marketing strategies in order to educate the public on overpopulation effects. "The intervention can be widespread and done at a low cost. A variety of print materials (flyers, brochures, fact sheets, stickers) needs to be produced and distributed throughout the communities such as at local places of worships, sporting events, local food markets, schools and at car parks (taxis / bus stands)."[REF] Such prompts work to introduce the problem so that social norms are easier to implement. Certain government policies are making it easier and more socially acceptable to use contraception and abortion methods. An example of a country whose laws and norms are hindering the global effort to slow population growth is Afghanistan. “The approval by Afghan President Hamid Karzai of the Shia Personal Status Law in March 2009 effectively destroyed Shia women’s rights and freedoms in Afghanistan. Under this law, women have no right to deny their husbands sex unless they are ill, and can be denied food if they do.”[REF] .

Overpopulation is related to the issue of birth control; some nations, like the People's Republic of China, use strict measures to reduce birth rates. Religious and ideological opposition to birth control has been cited as a factor contributing to overpopulation and poverty [REF]. Some leaders and environmentalists (such as Ted Turner) have suggested that there is an urgent need to strictly implement a China-like one-child policy globally by the United Nations, because this would help control and reduce population gradually [REF]. 

Indira Gandhi, late Prime Minister of India, implemented a forced sterilization programme in the 1970s. Officially, men with two children or more had to submit to sterilization, but many unmarried young men, political opponents and ignorant men were also believed to have been sterilized. This program is still remembered and criticized in India, and is blamed for creating a public aversion to family planning, which hampered Government programmes for decades [REF]. 

Urban designer Michael E. Arth has proposed a "choice-based, marketable birth license plan" he calls "birth credits."[REF] Birth credits would allow any woman to have as many children as she wants, as long as she buys a license for any children beyond an average allotment that would result in zero population growth (ZPG). If that allotment was determined to be one child, for example, then the first child would be free, and the market would determine what the license fee for each additional child would cost. Extra credits would expire after a certain time, so these credits could not be hoarded by speculators. The actual cost of the credits would only be a fraction of the actual cost of having and raising a child, so the credits would serve more as a wake-up call to women who might otherwise produce children without seriously considering the long term consequences to themselves or society [REF].

One option is to focus on education about overpopulation, family planning, and birth control methods, and to make birth-control devices like male/female condoms, pills and intrauterine devices easily available. Worldwide, nearly 40% of pregnancies are unintended (some 80 million unintended pregnancies each year) [REF]. An estimated 350 million women in the poorest countries of the world either did not want their last child, do not want another child or want to space their pregnancies, but they lack access to information, affordable means and services to determine the size and spacing of their families. In the developing world, some 514,000 women die annually of complications from pregnancy and abortion,[REF] with 86% of these deaths occurring in the sub-Saharan Africa region and South Asia [REF]. Additionally, 8 million infants die, many because of malnutrition or preventable diseases, especially from lack of access to clean drinking water [REF]. In the United States, in 2001, almost half of pregnancies were unintended [REF]. 

Egypt announced a program to reduce its overpopulation by family planning education and putting women in the workforce. It was announced in June 2008 by the Minister of Health and Population Hatem el-Gabali. The government has set aside 480 million Egyptian pounds (about 90 million U.S. dollars) for the program [REF].

In the 1970s, Gerard O'Neill suggested building space habitats that could support 30,000 times the carrying capacity of Earth using just the asteroid belt and that the Solar System as a whole could sustain current population growth rates for a thousand years [REF]. Marshall Savage (1992, 1994) has projected a human population of five quintillion throughout the Solar System by 3000, with the majority in the asteroid belt [REF]. Freeman Dyson (1999) favours the Kuiper belt as the future home of humanity, suggesting this could happen within a few centuries [REF]. In Mining the Sky, John&nbsp;S. Lewis suggests that the resources of the solar system could support 10 quadrillion (1016) people. 

K. Eric Drexler, famous inventor of the futuristic concept of molecular nanotechnology, has suggested in Engines of Creation that colonizing space will mean breaking the Malthusian limits to growth for the human species. 

It may be possible for other parts of the Solar System to be inhabited by humanity at some point in the future. Geoffrey Landis of NASA's Glenn Research Center in particular has pointed out that "[at] cloud-top level, Venus is the paradise planet", as one could construct aerostat habitats and floating cities there easily, based on the concept that breathable air is a lifting gas in the dense Venusian atmosphere. Venus would, like also Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, in the upper layers of their atmospheres, even afford a gravitation almost exactly as strong as that on Earth (see colonization of Venus) [REF]. Many authors, including Carl Sagan, Arthur&nbsp;C. Clarke,[REF] and Isaac Asimov,[REF] have argued that shipping the excess population into space is not a viable solution to human overpopulation. According to Clarke, "the population battle must be fought or won here on Earth" [REF]. The problem for these authors is not the lack of resources in space (as shown in books such as Mining the Sky[REF]), but the physical impracticality of shipping vast numbers of people into space to "solve" overpopulation on Earth. However, Gerard O'Neill's calculations show that Earth could offload all new population growth with a launch services industry about the same size as the current airline industry [REF]. A&nbsp;hypothetical extraterrestrial colony could potentially grow organically, with most of the inhabitants being the direct descendants of the original colonists.. 

Population growth is the change in a population over time, and can be quantified as the change in the number of individuals of any species in a population using "per unit time" for measurement. 
In biology, the term population growth is likely to refer to any known organism, but this article deals mostly with the application of the term to human populations in demography. 

In demography, population growth is used informally for the more specific term population growth rate (see below), and is often used to refer specifically to the growth of the human population of the world. 

Simple models of population growth include the Malthusian Growth Model and the logistic model. 

Population growth 1800-2011: from 1 billion to 7 billion estimated in 31.10.2011. During the year 2011 according to estimates:[REF] . 

Population[REF]
. |- Year Billion 
. |---- 1800 1 
. |---- 1927 2 
. |---- 1960 3 
. |---- 1974 4 
. |---- 1987 5 
. |---- 1999 6 
. |---- 2011* 7 
. |----- UNFPAUnited Nations Population Fund estimate 31.10.2011 . 

135 million people will be born 
57 million people will die and 
78 million people will increase the world population.

Population growth is determined by four factors, births(B), deaths(D), immigrants(I), and emigrants(E). 
Using a formula expressed as . 

∆P≡(B-D)+(I-E) . 

In other words, the population growth of a period can be calculated in two parts, natural growth of population (B-D) and mechanical growth of population (I-E),in which Mechanical growth of population is mainly affected by social factors, e.g. the advanced economies are growing faster while the backward economies are growing slowly even with negative growth.

In demographics and ecology, population growth rate (PGR) is the rate at which the number of individuals in a population increases in a given time period as a fraction of the initial population. Specifically, PGR ordinarily refers to the change in population over a unit time period, often expressed as a percentage of the number of individuals in the population at the beginning of that period. This can be written as the formula:[REF] . 

PGR = \frac{ \ln(P(t_2)) - \ln(P(t_1))} {(t_2-t_1)} . 

The most common way to express population growth is as a percentage, not as a rate. The change in population over a unit time period is expressed as a percentage of the population at the beginning of the time period. That is: . 

\mathrm{Percentage\ Growth} = \mathrm{Growth\ rate} \times 100%. 

For small time periods and growth rates, the added population is the growth rate multiplied by the time period. 

A positive growth ratio (or rate) indicates that the population is increasing, while a negative growth ratio indicates the population is decreasing. A growth ratio of zero indicates that there were the same number of people at the two times -- net difference between births, deaths a growth rate may be zero even when there are significant changes in the birth rates, death rates, immigration rates, and age distribution between the two times. 
[REF]
Equivalently, percent death rate = the average number of deaths in a year for every 100 people in the total population. 

If the length of the time is taken smaller and smaller, the PGR approaches the logarithmic derivative of the population function P. If the population as a function of time is exponential, say P(t)&nbsp;=&nbsp;Ceat, the logarithmic derivative is a. Thus, the PGR approximates the exponent a for populations with exponential growth. 

A related measure is the net reproduction rate. In the absence of migration, a net reproduction rate of more than one indicates that the population of women is increasing, while a net reproduction rate less than one (sub-replacement fertility) indicates that the population of women is decreasing.

Main articles: Overpopulation and population decline . 

Population exceeding the carrying capacity of an area or environment is called overpopulation. It may be caused by growth in population or by reduction in capacity. Spikes in human population can cause problems such as pollution and traffic congestion, these might be resolved or worsened by technological and economic changes. Conversely, such areas may be considered "underpopulated" if the population is not large enough to maintain an economic system (see population decline). Between these two extremes sits the notion of the optimum population.

Globally, the growth rate of the human population has been declining since peaking in 1962 and 1963 at 2.20% per annum. In 2009, the estimated annual growth rate was 1.1% [REF]. The CIA World Factbook gives the world annual birthrate, mortality rate, and growth rate as 1.915%, 0.812%, and 1.092% respectively[REF] The last one hundred years have seen a rapid increase in population due to medical advances and massive increase in agricultural productivity[REF] made possible by the Green Revolution [REF]. 

The actual annual growth in the number of humans fell from its peak of 88.0 million in 1989, to a low of 73.9 million in 2003, after which it rose again to 75.2 million in 2006. Since then, annual growth has declined. In 2009, the human population increased by 74.6 million, which is projected to fall steadily to about 41 million per annum in 2050, at which time the population will have increased to about 9.2 billion [REF]. Each region of the globe has seen great reductions in growth rate in recent decades, though growth rates remain above 2% in some countries of the Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa, and also in South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Latin America [REF]. 

Some countries experience negative population growth, especially in Eastern Europe mainly due to low fertility rates, high death rates and emigration. In Southern Africa, growth is slowing due to the high number of HIV-related deaths. Some Western Europe countries might also encounter negative population growth [REF]. Japan's population began decreasing in 2005 [REF].

The growth by country in the world increased from 1990 to 2008 with 1,423 million and 27 % growth. As persons the increase was among highest in India 290 million and China 192 million. Population growth was among highest in Qatar 174 % and United Arab Emirates 140 % [REF]. 

Rank Country Population (thousands) 2010 Population (thousands) 1990 Growth (%)1990-2010 
. |- World 6,895,889 5,306,425 30.0%
. |- 1 1,341,335 1,145,195 17.1%
. |- 2 1,224,614 873,785 40.2%
. |- 3 310,384 253,339 22.5%
. |- 4 239,871 184,346 30.1%
. |- 5 194,946 149,650 30.3%
. |- 6 173,593 111,845 55.3%
. |- 7 158,423 97,552 62.4%
. |- 8 148,692 105,256 41.3%
. |- 9 142,958 148,244 -3.6%
. |- 10 126,536 122,251 3.5%
. |- .

Population growth 1990-2008 (%)[REF]
. |----- Africa 55 %
. |----- Middle East 51 %
. |----- Asia 35 %
. |----- Latin America 30 %
. |----- OECD North America 24 %
. |----- OECD Europe 9 %
. |----- OECD Pacific 8 %
. |----- Former Soviet Union -1 %
. |----- Non-OECD Europe -11 %
. |----- . 

Many of the world's countries, including many in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, South Asia and South East Asia, have seen a sharp rise in population since the end of the Cold War. The fear is that high population numbers are putting further strain on natural resources, food supplies, fuel supplies, employment, housing, etc.; in some the less fortunate countries. The population of Chad has, for example, ultimately grown from 6,279,921 in 1993 to 10,329,208 in 2009,[REF] further straining its resources. Vietnam, Mexico, Nigeria, Egypt, Ethiopia and the DRC are witnessing a similar growth in population, strained resources and a possible overpopulation problem in the near future. 

The situation was most acute in northern, western and central Africa. Refugees from places like the Sudan have helped further strain the resources of neighbouring states like Chad and Egypt. The nation is also host to roughly 255,000 refugees from Sudan’s Darfur region, and about 77,000 refugees from the Central African Republic, whilst approximately 188,000 Chadians have been displaced by their own civil war and famines, have either fled to either the Sudan, the Niger or, more recently, Libya. 

Example nation 1st Population total. 2nd Population total. 3rd Population total. 4th Population total. 5th Population total. Life expectancy in years. Total population growth from 1st Pop. Total to 5th Pop. Total.

|- Eritrea* N/A* N/A* 3,437,000(1994)[REF] 4,298,269 (2002) 5,673,520 (2008)[REF] 61 (2008)[REF] 2,236,520 (since independence)
. |- Ethiopia* 23,457,000(1967)*[REF] 50,974,000(1990)* [REF] 54,939,000(1994) [REF] 67,673,031(2003) 79,221,000(2008)[REF] 55(2008)[REF] 55,764,000 
. |- Sudan** 14,355,000(1967)**[REF] 25,204,000(1990)** [REF] 27,361,000 (1994)**[REF] 38,114,160 (2003)** 42,272,000(2008)**[REF] 50(2008)**[REF] 27,917,000 
. |- Chad 3,410,000(1967)[REF] 5,679,000(1990) [REF] 6,183,000 (1994)[REF] 9,253,493(2003) 10,329,208 (2009)[REF] 47(2008)[REF] 6,919,205 
. |- Niger 3,546,000(1967)[REF] 7,732,000(1990) [REF] 8,846,000(1994)[REF] 10,790,352 (2001) 15,306,252 (2009)[REF] 44 (2008)[REF] 11,760,252 
. |- Nigeria 61,450,000(1967)[REF] 88,500,000(1990) [REF] 108,467,000 (1994)[REF] 129,934,911 (2002) 158,259,000 (2008)[REF] 47(2008)[REF] 96,809,000 
. |- Mali 4,745,000(1967)[REF] 8,156,000(1990),[REF] 10,462,000(1994)[REF] 11,340,480(2002) 14,517,176(2010) [REF]. 50(2008)[REF] 9,772,176 
. |- Mauritania 1,050,000(1967)[REF] 2,025,000(1990) [REF] 2,211,000 (1994)[REF] 2,667,859 (2003) 3,291,000 (2009)[REF] 54(2008)[REF] 2,241,000 
. |- Senegal 3,607,000(1967)[REF] 7,327,000(1990) [REF] 8,102,000 (1994) [REF] 9,967,215(2002) 13,711,597 (2009)[REF] 57(2008)[REF] 10,104,597 
. |- Gambia 343,000(1967)[REF] 861,000(1990) [REF] 1,081,000 (1994)[REF] 1,367,124 (2000) 1,705,000(2008)[REF] 55(2008)[REF] 1,362,000 
. |- Algeria 11,833,126 (1966)[REF] 25,012,000 (1990) [REF] 27,325,000 (1994) [REF] 32,818,500 (2003) 34,895,000[REF][REF](2008) 74 (2008)[REF] 23,061,874 
. |- The DRC/Zaire 16,353,000(1967)[REF] 35,562,000 (1990) [REF] 42,552,000 (1994) [REF] 55,225,478 (2003) 70,916,439 (2008) [REF][REF] 54(2008)[REF] 54,563,439 
. |- Egypt 30,083,419 (1966)[REF] 53,153,000 (1990) [REF] 58,326,000 (1994) [REF] 70,712,345 (2003) 79,089,650 [REF][REF] (2008) [REF] 72 (2008)[REF] 49,006,231 
. |- Réunion (French colony) 418,000 (1967)[REF] N/A(1990) [REF] N/A (1994)[REF] 720,934 (2003) 827,000 (2009) [REF] N/A (2008)[REF] 409,000 
. |- The Falkland Islands (UK Territory) 2,500(1967)[REF] N/A(1990) [REF] N/A(1994)[REF] 2,967 (2003) 3,140(2010)[REF] N/A(2008)[REF] 640 
. |- Chile 8,935,500(1967)[REF] 13,173,000 (1990) [REF] 13,994,000(1994)[REF] 15,116,435 (2002) 17,224,200 (2011) 77 (2008)[REF] 8,288,700 
. |- Colombia 19,191,000(1967)[REF] 32,987,000(1990) [REF] 34,520,000(1994)[REF] 41,088,227 (2002) 45,925,397(2010)[REF] 73 (2008)[REF] 26,734,397 
. |- Brazil 85,655,000(1967)[REF] 150,368,000 (1990) [REF] 153,725,000 (1994)[REF] 174,468,575 (2000) 190,732,694(2010) [REF] 72(2008)[REF] 105,077,694 
. |- Mexico 45,671,000(1967)[REF] 86,154,000(1990) [REF] 93,008,000(1994)[REF] 103,400,165 (2000) 112,322,757(2010)[REF] 76(2008)[REF] 66,651,757 
. |- Fiji 476,727 (1966)[REF] 765,000(1990) [REF] 771,000 (1994)[REF] 844,330 (2001) 849,000[REF] (2010) 70 (2008)[REF] 372,273 
. |- Nauru 6,050(1966)[REF] 10,000(1990) [REF] N/A (1994)[REF] 12,329 (2002) 9,322 (2011)[REF] N/A (2008)[REF] 3,272 
. |- Jamaican 1,876,000 (1967)[REF] 2,420,000 (1990) [REF] 2,429,000 (1994)[REF] 2,695,867 (2003) 2,847,232[REF](2010) 74 (2008)[REF] 971,232 
. |- Australia 11,540,764 (1964)[REF] 17,086,000 (1990) [REF] 17,843,000 (1994)[REF] 19,546,792 (2003) [REF] (2010) 82 (2008)[REF] 11,066,508 
. |- Albania 1,965,500(1964)[REF] 3,250,000 (1990) [REF] 3,414,000 (1994)[REF] 3,510,484 (2002) 2,986,952 (July 2010 est.)[REF][REF] (2010) 78 (2008)[REF] 1,021,452 
. |- Poland 31,944,000(1967)[REF] 38,180,000 (1990) [REF] 38,554,000 (1994)[REF] 38,626,349 (2001) 38,192,000(2010)[REF] 75 (2008)[REF] 6,248,000 
. |- Hungary 10,212,000(1967)[REF] 10,553,000 (1990) [REF] 10,261,000 (1994)[REF] 10,106,017 (2002) 9,979,000(2010)[REF] 73 (2008)[REF] -142,000 
. |- Bulgaria 8,226,564(1965)[REF] 8,980,000 (1990) [REF] 8,443,000 (1994)[REF] 7,707,495(2000) 7,351,234 (2011)[REF] 73 (2008)[REF] -875,330 
. |- UK 55,068,000 (1966)[REF] 57,411,000 (1990) [REF] 58,091,000 (1994) [REF] 58,789,194 (2002) 62,008,048 (2010)[REF] 79(2008)[REF] 7,020,048 
. |- Ireland/Éire 2,884,002(1966)[REF] 3,503,000(1990) [REF] 3,571,000 (1994)[REF] 3,840,838 (2000) 4,470,700 [REF] (2010) 78 (2008)[REF] 1,586,698 
. |- The PRC/China 720,000,000(1967)[REF] 1,139,060,000(1990) [REF] 1,208,841,000 (1994)[REF] 1,286,975,468 (2004) 1,339,724,852(2010)[REF] 73 (2008)[REF] 619,724,852 
. |- Japan*** 98,274,961(1965)[REF] 123,537,000(1990) [REF] 124,961,000 (1994)[REF] 127,333,002 (2002) 127,420,000 (2010)[REF] 82(2008)[REF] 28,123,865 
. |- Ryukyu Islands (Once occupied by America)*** 934,176(1965)[REF] — — — — — —
. |- India# 511,115,000 (1967)[REF] 843,931,000 (1990) [REF] 918,570,000 (1994)[REF] 1,028,610,328 (2001) 1,210,193,422(2011)[REF] 69 (2008)[REF] 699,078,422 
. |- . 

Notes 
* Eritrea left Ethiopia in 1991. 
** Split in to the nations of Sudan and Southern Sudan during 2011. 
*** Merged in 1972. 
# Merged in 1975.

According to projections, the world population will continue to grow until at least 2050, with the population reaching 9.1 billion in 2050 [REF].The one-child policy () is the one-child limitation in the population control policy of the People's Republic of China (PRC). The Chinese government refers to it under the official translation of family planning policy [REF]. It officially restricts married, urban couples to having only one child, while allowing exemptions for several cases, including rural couples, ethnic minorities, and parents without any siblings themselves [REF]. A spokesperson of the Committee on the One-Child Policy has said that approximately 35.9% of China's population is currently subject to the one-child restriction [REF]. The Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau are completely exempt from the policy. Also exempt from this law are foreigners living in China. 

This policy was introduced in 1978 and initially applied to first-born children in the year of 1978. It was created by the Chinese government to alleviate social, economic, and environmental problems in China,[REF] and authorities claim that the policy has prevented between 250 and 300 million births from its implementation until 2000,[REF] and 400 million births from 1979 to 2011 [REF]. The policy is controversial both within and outside China because of the manner in which the policy has been implemented, and because of concerns about negative social consequences [REF]. The policy has been implicated in an increase in forced abortions,[REF] female infanticide, and underreporting[REF] of female births, and has been suggested as a possible cause behind China's gender imbalance. Nonetheless, a 2008 survey undertaken by the Pew Research Center reported that 76% of the Chinese population supports the policy [REF]. 

The policy is enforced at the provincial level through fines that are imposed based on the income of the family and other factors. Population and Family Planning Commissions () exist at every level of government to raise awareness about the issue and carry out registration and inspection work. Despite this policy, there are still many citizens that continue to have more than one child [REF]. 

In 2008, China's National Population and Family Planning Commission said that the policy will remain in place for at least another decade [REF]. In 2010, it was announced that the majority of the citizens initially subject to the policy are no longer of reproductive age and it has been speculated that many citizens simply disregard or violate the policy in more recent years. The deputy director of the Commission stated that the policy would remain unaltered until at least 2015 [REF]. In March 2011, the Chinese government reviewed the policy and expressed considerations to allow for couples to have a second child [REF].

Population in China
. |- Year Million
. |----3 582,6
. |---- 1964 694,6
. |---- 1982 1008,2
. |---- 2000 1265,8
. |---- 2010 1339,7
. |----- Source: Census of China
. |----- During the period of Mao Zedong's leadership, while the crude birth rate fell from 37 to 20 per thousand [REF], infant mortality declined from 227/1000 births in 1949 to 53/1000 in 1981, and life expectancy dramatically increased from around 35 years in 1949 to 65 years in 1976 [REF]. The latter two factors resulted in a ballooning of the population from around 540 million in 1949 to 940 million in 1976 [REF]. 

In order to address overpopulation, the one-child policy promotes one-child families and forbids couples from having more than one child in urban areas. Parents with multiple children are not given the same benefits as parents of one child. In most cases, wealthy families pay a fee to the government in order to have a second child or more.

The limit has been strongly enforced in urban areas, but the actual implementation varies from location to location [REF]. In most rural areas, families are allowed to apply to have a second child if the first is a girl,[REF] or has a physical disability, mental illness or mental retardation [REF]. Second children are subject to birth spacing (usually 3 or 4 years). Additional children will result in large fines: families violating the policy are required to pay monetary penalties and might be denied bonuses at their workplace. Children born in overseas countries are not counted under the policy if they do not obtain Chinese citizenship. Chinese citizens returning from abroad can have a second child [REF]. 

As of 2007, 35.9% of the population were subject to a strict one-child limit. 52.9% were permitted to have a second child when the couple's first child is a girl; 9.6% of Chinese couples were permitted two children, regardless of their gender; and 1.6% - mainly Tibetans - had no limit at all [REF]. 

The social fostering or maintenance fee () sometimes called in the West a family planning fine, is collected as a fraction of either the annual disposable income of city dwellers or of the annual cash income of peasants, in the year of the child's birth [REF]. The parents also have to pay for both the children to go to school and all the family's health care. Some children who are in one-child families pay less than the children in other families. 

The one-child policy was designed from the outset to be a one generation policy [REF]. 

The one-child policy is now enforced at the provincial level, and enforcement varies; some provinces have relaxed the restrictions. Many provinces and cities, such as Henan[REF] and Beijing, permit two "only child" parents to have two children. As early as 1987, official policy granted local officials the flexibility to make exceptions and allow second children in the case of "practical difficulties" (such as cases in which the father is a disabled serviceman) or when both parents are single children,[REF] and some provinces had other exemptions worked into their policies as well [REF]. Following the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, a new exception to the regulations was announced in Sichuan province for parents who had lost children in the earthquake [REF]. Similar exceptions have previously been made for parents of severely disabled or deceased children [REF]. People have also tried to evade the policy by giving birth to a second child in Hong Kong, but at least for Guangdong residents, the one-child policy is also enforced if the birth was given in Hong Kong or abroad [REF]. 

Moreover, in accordance with PRC's affirmative action policies towards ethnic minorities, all non-Han ethnic groups are subjected to different rules and are usually allowed to have two children in urban areas, and three or four in rural areas. Han Chinese living in rural areas, also, are often permitted to have two children [REF]. Because of couples such as these, as well as urban couples who simply pay a fine (or "social maintenance fee") to have more children,[REF] the overall fertility rate of mainland China is closer to two children per family than to one child to a family (1.8 in 2008). The steepest drop in fertility occurred in the 1970s before one child per family was implemented in 1979 [REF]. Population policies and campaigns have been ongoing in China since the 1950s. During the 1970s, a campaign of 'One is good, two is okay, and three is too many' was heavily promoted [REF]. 

In April 2007 a study by the University of California, Irvine, which claimed to be the first systematic study of the policy, found that it had proved "remarkably effective" [REF]. Other reports have shown population ageing and negative population growth in some areas [REF]. 

An advocacy group, composed of academics inside and outside China, has studied the policy since 2001. That group distributed a report in 2004, documenting the policy's effects on age and gender distribution, but government response was not favorable. The group distributed another report in 2009, but the government has stated that the policy will not change until 2015 at the earliest [REF].

After the introduction of the one-child policy, the fertility rate in China fell from over three births per woman in 1980 (already a sharp reduction from more than five births per woman in the early 1970s) to approximately 1.8 in 2008 and 1.54 in 2011 [REF]. 

The Chinese government estimated that it had three to four hundred million fewer people in 2008 with the one-child policy, than it would have had otherwise [REF]. Chinese authorities thus consider the policy as a great success in helping to implement China's current economic growth. The reduction in the fertility rate and thus population growth has reduced the severity of problems that come with overpopulation, like epidemics, slums, overwhelmed social services (such as health, education, law enforcement), and strain on the ecosystem from abuse of fertile land and production of high volumes of waste. Even with the one-child policy in place, China still has one million more births than deaths every five weeks.

It is reported that the focus of China on population control helps provide a better health service for women and a reduction in the risks of death and injury associated with pregnancy. At family planning offices, women receive free contraception and pre-natal classes.

The individual savings rate has increased since the one-child policy was introduced. This has been partially attributed to the policy in two respects. First, the average Chinese household expends fewer resources, both in terms of time and money, on children, which gives many Chinese more money with which to invest. Second, since young Chinese can no longer rely on children to care for them in their old age, there is an impetus to save money for the future [REF].

The original intent of the one-child policy was economic, to reduce the demand of natural resources, maintaining a steady labor rate, reducing unemployment caused from surplus labor, and reducing the rate of exploitation [REF]. The CPC's justification for this policy was based on their support of Mao Zedong's supposedly Marxist theory of population growth, though Marx was actually witheringly critical of Malthusianism.[REF][REF] .

One type of criticism has come from those who acknowledge the challenges stemming from China's high population growth but believe that less intrusive options, including those that emphasized delay and spacing of births, could have achieved the same results over an extended period of time. Susan Greenhalgh's (2003) review of the policy-making process behind the adoption of the OCPF shows that some of these alternatives were known but not fully considered by China's political leaders [REF].

Another criticism is directed at the exaggerated claimed effects of the policy on the reduction in the total fertility rate. Studies by Chinese demographers, funded in part by the UN Fund for Population Activities, showed that combining poverty alleviation and health care with relaxed targets for family planning was more effective at reducing fertility than vigorous enforcement of very ambitious fertility reduction targets [REF]. In 1988, Zeng Yi and Professor T. Paul Schultz of Yale University discussed the effect of the transformation to the market on Chinese fertility, arguing that the introduction of the contract responsibility system in agriculture during the early 1980s weakened family planning controls during that period [REF]. Zeng contended that the "big cooking pot" system of the People's Communes had insulated people from the costs of having many children. By the late 1980s, economic costs and incentives created by the contract system were already reducing the number of children farmers wanted. 

As Hasketh, Lu, and Xing observe: "[T]he policy itself is probably only partially responsible for the reduction in the total fertility rate. The most dramatic decrease in the rate actually occurred before the policy was imposed. Between 1970 and 1979, the largely voluntary "late, long, few" policy, which called for later childbearing, greater spacing between children, and fewer children, had already resulted in a halving of the total fertility rate, from 5.9 to 2.9. After the one-child policy was introduced, there was a more gradual fall in the rate until 1995, and it has more or less stabilized at approximately 1.7 since then."[REF] These researchers note further that China could have expected a continued reduction in its fertility rate just from continued economic development, had it kept to the previous policy.

The one-child policy is challenged in principle and in practice for violating a human right to determine the size of one's own family. A 2001 report exposed that a quota of 20,000 abortions and sterilizations was set for Huaiji County in Guangdong Province in one year due to reported disregard of the one-child policy. The effort included using portable ultrasound devices to identify abortion candidates in remote villages. Earlier reports also show that women as far along as 8.5 months pregnant were forced to abort by injection of saline solution [REF]. There have also been reports of women, in their 9th month of pregnancy or already in labour, having their children killed whilst in the birth canal or immediately after birth [REF]. 

In 2002, China outlawed the use of physical force to make a woman submit to an abortion or sterilization, but it is not entirely enforced [REF]. In the execution of the policy, many local governments still demand abortions if the pregnancy violates local regulations. 

Although China has had a reputation for heavy-handed eugenics policies as part of its population planning policies, the government has backed away from such policies recently, as evidenced by China's ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which compels the nation to significantly reform its genetic testing laws [REF]. Recent scholarship has also emphasized the necessity of understanding a myriad of complex social relations that affect the meaning of informed consent in China [REF]. Furthermore, in 2003, China revised its marriage registration regulations and couples no longer have to submit to a pre-marital physical or genetic examination before being granted a marriage license [REF]. 

The United Nations Population Fund's (UNFPA) funding for this policy led the United States Congress to pull out of the UNFPA during the Reagan years,[REF] and again under George W. Bush's presidency, citing human rights abuses[REF] and stating that the right to "found a family" was protected under the Preamble in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [REF].
President Obama resumed U.S. government financial support for the UNFPA shortly after taking office in 2009, intending to "work[ing] collaboratively to reduce poverty, improve the health of women and children, prevent HIV/AIDS and provide family planning assistance to women in 154 countries" [REF].

As the first generation of law-enforced only children came of age for becoming parents themselves, one adult child was left with having to provide support for his or her two parents and four grandparents [REF]. Called the "4-2-1 Problem", this leaves the older generations with increased chances of dependency on retirement funds or charity in order to receive support. If personal savings, pensions, or state welfare fail, most senior citizens would be left entirely dependent upon their very small family or neighbours for assistance. If, for any reason, the single child is unable to care for their older adult relatives, the oldest generations would face a lack of resources and necessities. In response to such an issue, certain provinces maintained that couples were allowed to have two children if both parents were only children themselves. By 2007, all provinces in the nation except Henan had adopted this new adaptation;[REF][REF] Henan followed in 2011 [REF].

Some parents may over-indulge their only child. The media referred to the indulged children in one-child families as "little emperors". Since the 1990s, some people have worried that this will result in a higher tendency toward poor social communication and cooperation skills among the new generation, as they have no siblings at home. No social studies have investigated the ratio of these over-indulged children and to what extent they are indulged. With the first generation of children born under the policy (which initially became a requirement for most couples with first children born starting in 1979 and extending into 1980s) reaching adulthood, such worries were reduced [REF]. However, the "little emperor syndrome" and additional expressions, describing the generation of Chinese singletons are very abundant in the Chinese media, Chinese academy and popular discussions. Being over-indulged, lacking self discipline and having no adaptive capabilities are adjectives which are highly associated with Chinese singletons,[REF]
Some 30 delegates called on the government in the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) in March 2007 to abolish the one-child rule, attributing their beliefs to "social problems and personality disorders in young people". One statement read, "It is not healthy for children to play only with their parents and be spoiled by them: it is not right to limit the number to two children per family, either."[REF] The proposal was prepared by Ye Tingfang, a professor at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, who suggested that the government at least restore the previous rule that allowed couples to have up to two children. According to a scholar, "The one-child limit is too extreme. It violates nature’s law. And in the long run, this will lead to mother nature’s revenge."[REF][REF] .

Government officials and especially wealthy individuals have often been able to violate the policy in spite of fines [REF]. For example, between 2000 and 2005, as many as 1,968 officials in central China's Hunan province were found to be violating the policy, according to the provincial family planning commission; also exposed by the commission were 21 national and local lawmakers, 24 political advisors, 112 entrepreneurs and 6 senior intellectuals [REF]. Some of the offending officials did not face penalties,[REF] although the government did respond by raising fines and calling on local officials to "expose the celebrities and high-income people who violate the family planning policy and have more than one child."[REF] .

A way to escape the strict rules of the one-child policy is for Chinese women to give birth to their second child overseas. A favourite destination was Hong Kong. Hong Kong is exempt from the one-child policy and the Hong Kong passport, which is different from a China mainland passport, provides additional advantages. Recently though, the Hong Kong government has drastically reduced the quota of births set for non-local women in public hospitals. As a result fees for delivering babies there have surged. As further admission cuts or a total ban on non-local births in Hong Kong are being considered, mainland agencies that arrange for expectant mothers to give birth overseas are predicting a surge in those going to North America [REF]. As the US practices birthright citizenship children born in the US will be US citizens. The closest option (from China) is Saipan in the Northern Mariana Islands, a US dependency in the western Pacific Ocean that allows Chinese visitors without visa restrictions. The island is currently experiencing an upswing in Chinese births. This option is used by relatively affluent Chinese who often have secondary motives as well, wishing their children to be able to leave communist China when they grow older or bring their parents to the U.S. Canada is less popular as Ottawa denies many visa requests [REF].

China, like many other Asian countries, has a long tradition of son preference [REF]. The commonly accepted explanation for son preference is that sons in rural families may be thought to be more helpful in farm work. Both rural and urban populations have economic and traditional incentives, including widespread remnants of Confucianism, to prefer sons over daughters. Sons are preferred as they provide the primary financial support for the parents in their retirement, and a son's parents typically are better cared for than his wife's. In addition, Chinese traditionally hold that daughters, on their marriage, become primarily part of the groom's family. Male-to-female sex ratios in the current Chinese population are high in both rural and urban areas [REF].

The sex ratio at birth (between male and female births) in mainland China reached 117:100 in the year 2000, substantially higher than the natural baseline, which ranges between 103:100 and 107:100. It had risen from 108:100 in 1981—at the boundary of the natural baseline—to 111:100 in 1990 [REF]. According to a report by the National Population and Family Planning Commission, there will be 30 million more men than women in 2020, potentially leading to social instability, and courtship-motivated emigration [REF]. The correlation between the increase of sex ratio disparity on birth and the deployment of one child policy would appear to have been caused by the one-child policy. 

Other Asian regions also have higher than average ratios, including Taiwan (110:100) and South Korea (108:100), which do not have a family planning policy[REF] and the ratio in South Korea was as high as 116:100 in the early 1990s but since then has moved substantially back toward a normal range, with a ratio of 107:100 in 2005 [REF]. Many studies have explored the reason for the gender-based birth rate disparity in China as well as other countries. A study in 1990 attributed the high preponderance of reported male births in mainland China to four main causes: diseases which affect females more severely than males; the result of widespread underreporting of female births; the illegal practice of sex-selective abortion made possible by the widespread availability of ultrasound; and finally, acts of child abandonment and infanticide [REF]. The number of bachelors in China had already increased between 1990 and 2005, implying that China's lack of brides is not solely linked to the one-child policy, as single-child families were only enforced from 1979 [REF]. 

In a recent paper, Emily Oster (2005) proposed a biological explanation for the gender imbalance in Asian countries, including China. Using data on viral prevalence by country as well as estimates of the effect of hepatitis on sex ratio, Oster claimed that Hepatitis B could account for up to 75% of the gender disparity in China [REF]. 

Monica Das Gupta (2005) has shown that "whether or not females 'go missing' is determined by the existing sex composition of the family into which they are conceived. Girls with no older sisters have similar chances of survival as boys. Girls conceived in families that already have a daughter, experience steeply higher probabilities of being aborted or of dying in early childhood. Gupta claims that cultural factors provide the overwhelming explanation for the "missing" females."[REF] . 

The disparity in the sex ratio at birth increases dramatically after the first birth, for which the ratios remained steadily within the natural baseline over the 20 year interval between 1980 and 1999. Thus, a large majority of couples appear to accept the outcome of the first pregnancy, whether it is a boy or a girl. If the first child is a girl, and they are able to have a second child, then a couple may take extraordinary steps to assure that the second child is a boy. If a couple already has two or more boys, the sex ratio of higher parity births swings decidedly in a feminine direction [REF]. 

This demographic evidence indicates that while families highly value having male offspring, a secondary norm of having a girl or having some balance in the sexes of children often comes into play. For example, Zeng et al. (1993) reported a study based on the 1990 census in which they found sex ratios of just 65 or 70 boys per 100 girls for births in families that already had two or more boys [REF]. A study by Anderson and Silver (1995) found a similar pattern among both Han and non-Han nationalities in Xinjiang Province: a strong preference for girls in high parity births in families that had already borne two or more boys [REF]. This evidence is consistent with the observation by another researcher that for a majority of rural families "their ideal family size is one boy and one girl, at most two boys and one girl" [REF]. 

A 2006 review article[REF] by the Editorial Board of Population Research (), one of China's leading demography journals, argued that only an approach that makes the rights of women central can succeed in bringing down China's high gender ratio at birth and improve the survival rate of female infants and girls. A section written by East China Normal University demography professor Ci Qinying, "Research on the Sex Ratio at Birth Should Take a Gender Discrimination Approach," argued that researchers must pay closer attention to gender issues in demography,[REF][REF] and a human rights perspective in demographic research is crucial [REF]. 

The authors of another review article, "Girl Survival in China: History, Present Situation and Prospects," which was presented at a 2005 conference supported by the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA), concluded that "The Chinese government has already set the goal of achieving a normal gender ratio at birth by 2010, and to achieve preliminary results in establishing a new cultural outlook on marriage and having children. The government is working to change the system, way of thinking and other obstacles to attacking the root of the problem. Only if equality of males and females is strongly promoted .. will the harmonious and sustainable development of society be possible."[REF] .

 The social pressure exerted by the one-child policy has affected the rate at which parents abandon undesirable children, and many live in state-sponsored orphanages, from which thousands are adopted internationally and by Chinese parents each year. In the 1980s and early 1990s, poor care and high mortality rates in some state institutions generated intense international pressure for reform [REF]. 

According to Sten Johansson and Ola Nygren (1991) adoptions accounted for half of the so-called "missing girls" in the 1980s in the PRC [REF]. Through the 1980s, as the one-child policy came into force, parents who desired a son but bore a daughter in some cases failed to report or delayed the reporting of the birth of the girl to the authorities. But rather than neglecting or abandoning unwanted girls, the parents may have offered them up for formal or informal adoption. A majority of children who went through formal adoption in China in the later 1980s were girls, and the proportion who were girls increased over time (Johansson and Nygren 1991). 

The practice of adopting out unwanted girls is consistent with both the son preference of many Chinese couples and the findings of Zeng et al. (1993) and Anderson and Silver (1995) that under some circumstances families have a preference for girls, in particular when they have already satisfied their goals for sons. Research by Weiguo Zhang (2006) on child adoption in rural China reveals increasing receptivity to adopting girls, including by infertile and childless couples [REF]. 

In 1992, China instituted its first Adoption Law. Officially registered adoptions increased from about 2,000 in 1992 to 55,000 in 2001. According to one scholar, these figures "represent a small proportion of adoptions in China because many adopted children were adopted informally without official registrations. International adoption rates climbed dramatically after the early 1990s, increasing to the U.S. alone from about 200 in 1992 to more than 7,900 in 2005 [REF]. 

According to the Los Angeles Times, many babies put up for adoption had not been abandoned by their parents, but confiscated by family planning officials [REF].

Gender-selected abortion, abandonment, and infanticide are illegal in China. Nevertheless, the US State Department,[REF] the Parliament of the United Kingdom,[REF] and the human rights organization Amnesty International[REF] have all declared that China's family planning programs contribute to infanticide. 

Anthropologist G. William Skinner at the University of California–Davis and Chinese researcher Yuan Jianhua have claimed that infanticide was fairly common in China before the 1990s [REF].

A 2006 China Daily report stated that wealthy couples are increasingly turning to fertility medicines to have multiple births, because of the lack of penalties against couples who have more than one child in their first birth. According to the report, the number of multiple births per year in China had doubled by 2006 [REF].The demographics of the People's Republic of China are identified by a large population with a relatively small youth division, which is partially a result of the China's one-child policy. The population policies implemented in China since 1979 have helped to prevent between 350 and 400 million more births [REF]. 

Today, China's population is over 1.3 billion, the largest of any country in the world. According to the 2010 census, 91.51% of the population was of the Han nationality, and 8.49% were minorities. China's population growth rate is only 0.47%, ranking 156th in the world. China conducted its sixth national population census on November 1, 2010 [REF]. Unless otherwise indicated, the statistics on this page pertain to mainland China only; see also Demographics of Hong Kong, Demographics of Macau, and Demographics of Taiwan.

2100 BC: 14,000,000
2 AD: 60,000,000
1000: 40,000,000
1500: 103,000,000
1650: 123,000,000
1750: 260,000,000
1850: 412,000,000 .

The People's Republic of China conducted censuses in 1953, 1964, 1982, 1990, 2000, and 2010. In 1987, the government announced that the fourth national census would take place in 1990 and that there would be one every ten years thereafter. The 1982 census (which reported a total population of 1,008,180,738) is generally accepted as significantly more reliable, accurate, and thorough than the previous two. Various international organizations eagerly assisted the Chinese in conducting the 1982 census, including the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, which donated US$15.6 million for the preparation and execution of the census. 

China has been the world's most populous nation for many centuries. When China took its first post-1949 census in 1953, the population stood at 583 million; by the fifth census in 2000, the population had more than doubled, reaching 1.2 billion. 

Population of China according to province 1953-2010 [REF]
. |-bgcolor="#e0e0e0" Province orautonomous region census 1952 census 1964 census 1982 census 1990 census 2000 census 2010
. |-bgcolor="#e0e0e0" Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % Number %
. |- Beijing Municipality 2,768,149 0.48 7,568,495 1.09 9,230,687 0.92 10,819,407 0.95 13,820,000 1.09 19,612,368 1.46
. |- Hebei 35,984,644 6.18 45,687,781 6.58 53,005,876 5.26 61,082,439 5.39 67,440,000 5.33 71,854,202 5.36
. |- Tianjin Municipality 2,693,831 0.46 7,764,141 0.77 8,785,402 0.77 10,010,000 0.79 12,938,224 0.97
. |- Shanxi 14,314,485 2.46 18,015,067 2.59 25,291,389 2.51 28,759,014 2.54 32,970,000 2.60 35,712,111 2.67
. |- Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region 6,100,104 1.05 12,348,638 1.78 19,274,279 1.91 21,456,798 1.89 23,760,000 1.88 24,706,321 1.84
. |- Rehe (now defunct) 5,160,822 0.89 
. |- Liaoning 18,545,147 3.18 26,946,200 3.88 35,721,693 3.54 39,459,697 3.48 42,380,000 3.35 43,746,323 3.27
. |- Jilin 11,290,073 1.94 15,668,663 2.26 22,560,053 2.24 24,658,721 2.18 27,280,000 2.16 27,462,297 2.05
. |- Heilongjiang 11,897,309 2.04 20,118,271 2.90 32,665,546 3.24 35,214,873 3.11 36,890,000 2.91 38,312,224 2.86
. |- Shanghai Municipality 6,204,417 1.06 10,816,458 1.56 11,859,748 1.18 13,341,896 1.18 16,740,000 1.32 23,019,148 1.72
. |- Jiangsu 41,252,192 7.08 44,504,608 6.41 60,521,114 6.00 67,056,519 5.91 74,380,000 5.88 78,659,903 5.87
. |- Zhejiang 22,865,747 3.92 28,318,573 4.08 38,884,603 3.86 41,445,930 3.66 46,770,000 3.69 54,426,891 4.06
. |- Anhui 30,343,637 5.21 31,241,657 4.50 49,665,724 4.93 56,180,813 4.96 59,860,000 4.73 59,500,510 4.44
. |- Fujian 13,142,721 2.26 16,757,223 2.41 25,931,106 2.57 30,097,274 2.65 34,710,000 2.74 36,894,216 2.75
. |- Jiangxi 16,772,865 2.88 21,068,019 3.03 33,184,827 3.29 37,710,281 3.33 41,400,000 3.27 44,567,475 3.33
. |- Shandong 48,876,548 8.39 55,519,038 7.99 74,419,054 7.38 84,392,827 7.44 90,790,000 7.17 95,793,065 7.15
. |- Henan 44,214,594 7.59 50,325,511 7.25 74,422,739 7.38 85,509,535 7.54 92,560,000 7.31 94,023,567 7.02
. |- Hubei 27,789,693 4.77 33,709,344 4.85 47,804,150 4.74 53,969,210 4.76 60,280,000 4.76 57,237,740 4.27
. |- Hunan 33,226,954 5.70 37,182,286 5.35 54,008,851 5.36 60,659,754 5.35 64,440,000 5.09 65,683,722 4.90
. |- Guangdong 34,770,059 5.97 42,800,849 6.16 59,299,220 5.88 62,829,236 5.54 86,420,000 6.83 104,303,132 7.79
. |- Hainan 7,870,000 0.62 8,671,518 0.65
. |- Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 19,560,822 3.36 20,845,017 3.00 36,420,960 3.61 42,245,765 3.73 44,890,000 3.55 46,026,629 3.55
. |- Sichuan 62,303,999 10.69 67,956,490 9.78 99,713,310 9.89 107,218,173 9.46 83,290,000 6.58 80,418,200 6.00
. |- Chongqing Municipality 30,900,000 2.44 28,846,170 2.15
. |- Guizhou 15,037,310 2.58 17,140,521 2.47 28,552,997 2.83 32,391,066 2.86 35,250,000 2.78 34,746,468 2.59
. |- Yunnan 17,472,737 3.00 20,509,525 2.95 32,553,817 3.23 36,972,610 3.26 42,880,000 3.39 45,966,239 3.43
. |- Tibet Autonomous Region 1,273,969 0.22 1,251,225 0.18 1,892,393 0.19 2,196,010 0.19 2,620,000 0.21 3,002,166 0.22
. |- Xikang (now defunct) 3,381,064 0.58 
. |- Shaanxi 15,881,281 2.73 20,766,915 2.99 28,904,423 2.87 32,882,403 2.90 36,050,000 2.85 37,327,378 2.79
. |- Gansu 12,928,102 2.22 12,630,569 1.82 19,569,261 1.94 22,371,141 1.97 25,620,000 2.02 25,575,254 1.91
. |- Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region 3,895,578 0.39 4,655,451 0.41 5,620,000 0.44 6,301,350 0.47
. |- Qinghai 1,676,534 0.29 2,145,604 0.31 3,895,706 0.39 4,456,946 0.39 5,180,000 0.41 5,626,722 0.42
. |- Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region 4,873,608 0.84 7,270,067 1.05 13,081,681 1.30 15,155,778 1.34 19,250,000 1.52 21,813,334 1.63
. |- Military personnel 4,238,210 3,199,100 2,500,000 2,300,000 
. |- Population with permanent residence difficult to define 4,649,985 
. |-bgcolor="#e0e0e0" Total mainland China 582,603,417 694,581,759 1,008,175,288 1,133,682,501 1,265,830,000 1,339,724,852 . 

In the 1920s and 1930s, Chinese interest in social programs through reproductive control, including eugenics, intensified. Beginning in the mid-1950s, the Chinese government introduced, with varying degrees of success, a number of family planning, or population control, campaigns and programs. China's fast-growing population was a major policy matter for its leaders in the mid-twentieth century, so that in the early 1970s, the government implemented the stringent one-child policy (publicly announced in 1979). Under this policy, which had different guidelines for national minorities, married couples were officially permitted only one child. As a result of the policy, China successfully achieved its goal of a more stable and much-reduced fertility rate; in 2010 women had an average of 1.54 children versus an estimated 5.4 children in 1971. Enforcement of the program, however, varied considerably from place to place, depending on the vigilance of local population control workers.

In 1982 China conducted its first population census since 1964. It was by far the most thorough and accurate census taken since 1949 and confirmed that China was a nation of more than 1 billion people, or about one-fifth of the world's population. The census provided demographers with a set of data on China's age-sex structure, fertility and mortality rates, and population density and distribution. Information was also gathered on minority ethnic groups, urban population, and marital status. For the first time since the People's Republic of China was founded, demographers had reliable information on the size and composition of the Chinese work force. The nation began preparing for the 1982 census in late 1976. Chinese census workers were sent to the United States and Japan to study modern census-taking techniques and automation. Computers were installed in every provincial-level unit except Tibet and were connected to a central processing system in the Beijing headquarters of the State Statistical Bureau. Pretests and small scale trial runs were conducted and checked for accuracy between 1980 and 1981 in twenty-four provincial-level units. Census stations were opened in rural production brigades and urban neighborhoods. Beginning 1 July 1982, each household sent a representative to a census station to be enumerated. The census required about a month to complete and employed approximately 5 million census takers. 

The 1982 census collected data in nineteen demographic categories relating to individuals and households. The thirteen areas concerning individuals were name, relationship to head of household, sex, age, nationality, registration status, educational level, profession, occupation, status of nonworking persons, marital status, number of children born and still living, and number of births in 1981. The six items pertaining to households were type (domestic or collective), serial number, number of persons, number of births in 1981, number of deaths in 1981, and number of registered persons absent for more than one year. Information was gathered in a number of important areas for which previous data were either extremely inaccurate or simply nonexistent, including fertility, marital status, urban population, minority ethnic groups, sex composition, age distribution, and employment and unemployment. 

A fundamental anomaly in the 1982 statistics was noted by some Western analysts. They pointed out that although the birth and death rates recorded by the census and those recorded through the household registration system were different, the two systems arrived at similar population totals. The discrepancies in the vital rates were the result of the underreporting of both births and deaths to the authorities under the registration system; families would not report some births because of the one-child policy and would not report some deaths so as to hold on to the rations of the deceased. 

Nevertheless, the 1982 census was a watershed for both Chinese and world demographics. After an eighteen-year gap, population specialists were given a wealth of reliable, up-to-date figures on which to reconstruct past demographic patterns, measure current population conditions, and predict future population trends. For example, Chinese and foreign demographers used the 1982 census age-sex structure as the base population for forecasting and making assumptions about future fertility trends. The data on age-specific fertility and mortality rates provided the necessary base-line information for making population projections. The census data also were useful for estimating future manpower potential, consumer needs, and utility, energy, and health-service requirements. The sudden abundance of demographic data helped population specialists immeasurably in their efforts to estimate world population. Previously, there had been no accurate information on these 21 percent of the Earth's inhabitants. Demographers who had been conducting research on global population without accurate data on the Chinese fifth of the world's population were particularly thankful for the 1982 breakthrough census.

Initially, China's post-1949 leaders were ideologically disposed to view a large population as an asset. But the liabilities of a large, rapidly growing population soon became apparent. For one year, starting in August 1956, vigorous support was given to the Ministry of Public Health's mass birth control efforts. These efforts, however, had little impact on fertility. After the interval of the Great Leap Forward, Chinese leaders again saw rapid population growth as an obstacle to development, and their interest in birth control revived. In the early 1960s, schemes somewhat more muted than during the first campaign, emphasized the virtues of late marriage. Birth control offices were set up in the central government and some provincial-level governments in 1964. The second campaign was particularly successful in the cities, where the birth rate was cut in half during the 1963–66 period. The upheaval of the Cultural Revolution brought the program to a halt, however. 

In 1972 and 1973 the party mobilized its resources for a nationwide birth control campaign administered by a group in the State Council. Committees to oversee birth control activities were established at all administrative levels and in various collective enterprises. This extensive and seemingly effective network covered both the rural and the urban population. In urban areas public security headquarters included population control sections. In rural areas the country's "barefoot doctors" distributed information and contraceptives to people's commune members. By 1973 Mao Zedong was personally identified with the family planning movement, signifying a greater leadership commitment to controlled population growth than ever before. Yet until several years after Mao's death in 1976, the leadership was reluctant to put forth directly the rationale that population control was necessary for economic growth and improved living standards. 

Population growth targets were set for both administrative units and individual families. In the mid-1970s the maximum recommended family size was two children in cities and three or four in the country. Since 1979 the government has advocated a one-child limit for both rural and urban areas and has generally set a maximum of two children in special circumstances. As of 1986 the policy for minority nationalities was two children per couple, three in special circumstances, and no limit for ethnic groups with very small populations. The overall goal of the one-child policy was to keep the total population within 1.2 billion through the year 2000, on the premise that the Four Modernizations program would be of little value if population growth was not brought under control. 

The one-child policy was a highly ambitious population control program. Like previous programs of the 1960s and 1970s, the one-child policy employed a combination of public education, social pressure, and in some cases coercion. The one-child policy was unique, however, in that it linked reproduction with economic cost or benefit. 

Under the one-child program, a sophisticated system rewarded those who observed the policy and penalized those who did not. Couples with only one child were given a "one-child certificate" entitling them to such benefits as cash bonuses, longer maternity leave, better child care, and preferential housing assignments. In return, they were required to pledge that they would not have more children. In the countryside, there was great pressure to adhere to the one-child limit. Because the rural population accounted for approximately 60 percent of the total, the effectiveness of the one-child policy in rural areas was considered the key to the success or failure of the program as a whole. 

In rural areas the day-to-day work of family planning was done by cadres at the team and brigade levels who were responsible for women's affairs and by health workers. The women's team leader made regular household visits to keep track of the status of each family under her jurisdiction and collected information on which women were using contraceptives, the methods used, and which had become pregnant. She then reported to the brigade women's leader, who documented the information and took it to a monthly meeting of the commune birth-planning committee. According to reports, ceilings or quotas had to be adhered to; to satisfy these cutoffs, unmarried young people were persuaded to postpone marriage, couples without children were advised to "wait their turn," women with unauthorized pregnancies were pressured to have abortions, and those who already had children were urged to use contraception or undergo sterilization. Couples with more than one child were exhorted to be sterilized. 

The one-child policy enjoyed much greater success in urban than in rural areas. Even without state intervention, there were compelling reasons for urban couples to limit the family to a single child. Raising a child required a significant portion of family income, and in the cities a child did not become an economic asset until he or she entered the work force at age sixteen. Couples with only one child were given preferential treatment in housing allocation. In addition, because city dwellers who were employed in state enterprises received pensions after retirement, the sex of their first child was less important to them than it was to those in rural areas. 

Numerous reports surfaced of coercive measures used to achieve the desired results of the one-child policy. The alleged methods ranged from intense psychological pressure to the use of physical force, including some grisly accounts of forced abortions and infanticide. Chinese officials admitted that isolated, uncondoned abuses of the program occurred and that they condemned such acts, but they insisted that the family planning program was administered on a voluntary basis using persuasion and economic measures only. International reaction to the allegations were mixed. The UN Fund for Population Activities and the International Planned Parenthood Federation were generally supportive of China's family planning program. The United States Agency for International Development, however, withdrew US$10 million from the Fund in March 1985 based on allegations that coercion had been used. 

Observers suggested that an accurate assessment of the one-child program would not be possible until all women who came of childbearing age in the early 1980s passed their fertile years. As of 1987 the one-child program had achieved mixed results. In general, it was very successful in almost all urban areas but less successful in rural areas. 

Rapid fertility reduction associated with the one-child policy has potentially negative results. For instance, in the future the elderly might not be able to rely on their children to care for them as they have in the past, leaving the state to assume the expense, which could be considerable. Based on United Nations and Chinese government statistics, it was estimated in 1987 that by the year 2000 the population 60 years and older (the retirement age is 60 in urban areas) would number 127 million, or 10.1 percent of the total population; the projection for 2025 was 234 million elderly, or 16.4 percent. According to projections based on the 1982 census, if the one-child policy were maintained to the year 2000, 25 percent of China's population would be age 65 or older by the year 2040.

Overall
While China is the most populated country in the world, its national population density (137/km2) is not very high, similar to those of Switzerland and the Czech Republic. The overall population density of China conceals major regional variations, the western and northern part have a few million people, while eastern half has about 1.3 billion. The vast majority of China's population lives in the fertile plains of the east. 

Coast and eastern China
In the 11 provinces, special municipalities, and autonomous regions along the southeast coast, population density was 320.6 people per km2. 

Broadly speaking, the population was concentrated east of the mountains and south of the northern steppe. The most densely populated areas included the Yangtze River Valley (of which the delta region was the most populous), Sichuan Basin, North China Plain, Pearl River Delta, and the industrial area around the city of Shenyang in the northeast. 

Western areas
Population is most sparse in the mountainous, desert, and grassland regions of the northwest and southwest. In Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, portions are completely uninhabited, and only a few sections have populations denser than ten people per km2. The Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, and Tibet autonomous regions and Qinghai and Gansu provinces comprise 55 percent of the country's land area but in 1985 contained only 5.7 percent of its population. 

   

Area (km2) pop density
. |- China 9,650,000 (100%) 1,300,000,000 (100%) 134.7 h/km2
. |- 5 provinces 5 246 400 km2 (54.45%) 79 533 000 h. (6.345%) 15.16 h/km2
. |- Inner Mongolia 1,183,000 (12.28% ) 24,051,000
. |- Xinjiang 1,660,000 (17.23%) 20,952,000
. |- Tibet 1,228,400 (12.75%) 2,842,000
. |- Qinghai 721,000 (7.48%) 5,516,000
. |- Gansu 454,000 (4.71%) 26,172,000
. |- China proper 4,403,605 (45,55%) 1,221,000,000 (93,655%) 277.27 h/km2
. |- Source: [REF] . 

Men/Women concern
Future challenges for China will be the gender disparity. According to the 2010 census, males account for 51.27 percent of China's 1.34 billion people, while females made up 48.73 percent of the total. Sex ratio(the number of males for each female in a population) at birth was 118.06 percent in 2010, higher than the 116.86 percent of 2000, but 0.53 points lower than the ratio of 118.59 percent in 2005 [REF]. In most western countries the sex ratio at birth is around 105 boys to 100 girls(51.22 percent).

US Census Bureau, 2010 est [REF]. :

2020: 1,384,545,000
2030: 1,391,491,000
2040: 1,358,519,000
2050: 1,303,723,000
United Nations, 2010 est [REF]. :

2020: 1,387,792,000
2030: 1,393,076,000
2040: 1,360,906,000
2050: 1,295,604,000
2060: 1,211,538,000
2070: 1,125,903,000
2080: 1,048,132,000
2090: 984,547,000
2100: 941,042,000 .

In 1949 crude death rates were probably higher than 30 per 1,000, and the average life expectancy was only 35 years. Beginning in the early 1950s, mortality steadily declined; it continued to decline through 1978 and remained relatively constant through 1987. One major fluctuation was reported in a computer reconstruction of China's population trends from 1953 to 1987 produced by the United States Bureau of the Census. The computer model showed that the crude death rate increased dramatically during the famine years associated with the Great Leap Forward (1958–60). 

According to Chinese government statistics, the crude birth rate followed five distinct patterns from 1949 to 1982. It remained stable from 1949 to 1954, varied widely from 1955 to 1965, experienced fluctuations between 1966 and 1969, dropped sharply in the late 1970s, and increased from 1980 to 1981. Between 1970 and 1980, the crude birth rate dropped from 36.9 per 1,000 to 17.6 per 1,000. The government attributed this dramatic decline in fertility to the wǎn xī shǎo ("晚、稀、少", or "late, long, few": later marriages, longer intervals between births, and fewer children) birth control campaign. However, elements of socioeconomic change, such as increased employment of women in both urban and rural areas and reduced infant mortality (a greater percentage of surviving children would tend to reduce demand for additional children), may have played some role. The birth rate increased in both 1981 and 1982 to a level of 21 per 1,000, primarily as a result of a marked rise in marriages and first births. The rise was an indication of problems with the one-child policy of 1979. Chinese sources, however, indicated that the birth rate decreased to 17.8 in 1985 and remained relatively constant thereafter. 

In urban areas, the housing shortage may have been at least partly responsible for the decreased birth rate. Also, the policy in force during most of the 1960s and the early 1970s of sending large numbers of high school graduates to the countryside deprived cities of a significant proportion of persons of childbearing age and undoubtedly had some effect on birth rates (see Cultural Revolution (1966–76)). Primarily for economic reasons, rural birth rates tended to decline less than urban rates. The right to grow and sell agricultural products for personal profit and the lack of an old-age welfare system were incentives for rural people to produce many children, especially sons, for help in the fields and for support in old age. Because of these conditions, it is unclear to what degree education had been able to erode traditional values favoring large families. 

Today, the population continues to grow. There is also a serious gender imbalance. Census data obtained in 2000 revealed that 119 boys were born for every 100 girls, and among China’s "floating population" the ratio was as high as 128:100. These situations led the government in July 2004 to ban selective abortions of female fetuses. It is estimated that this imbalance will rise until 2025–2030 to reach 20% then slowly decrease [REF]. 

China now has an increasingly aging population; it is projected that 11.8% of the population in 2020 will be 65 years of age and older. Health care has improved dramatically in China since 1949. Major diseases such as cholera, typhoid, and scarlet fever have been brought under control. Life expectancy has more than doubled, and infant mortality has dropped significantly. On the negative side, the incidence of cancer, cerebrovascular disease, and heart disease has increased to the extent that these have become the leading causes of death. Economic reforms initiated in the late 1970s fundamentally altered methods of providing health care; the collective medical care system has been gradually replaced by a more individual-oriented approach. 

In Hong Kong, the birth rate of 0.9% is lower than its death rate. Hong Kong's population increases because of immigration from the mainland and a large expatriate population comprising about 4%. Like Hong Kong, Macau also has a low birth rate relying on immigration to maintain its population.

According to the 2000 census, the TFR was 1.85 (0.86 for cities, 1.08 for towns and 1.43 for villages/outposts). Beijing had the lowest TFR at 0.67, while Guizhou had the highest at 2.19. The Xiangyang district of Jiamusi city (Heilongjiang) has a TFR of 0.41, which is the lowest TFR recorded anywhere in the world in recorded history. Other extremely low TFR counties are: 0.43 in the Heping district of Tianjin city (Tianjin), and 0.46 in the Mawei district of Fuzhou city (Fujian). At the other end TFR was 3.96 in Geji County (Tibet), 4.07 in Jiali County (Tibet), and 5.47 in Baqing County (Tibet) [REF]. 

The 2010 census reported a TFR of 1.4 [REF].

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated. 
No statistics have been included for areas currently governed by the Republic of China (Taiwan). Unless stated otherwise, statistics refer only to mainland China. (See Demographics of Hong Kong and Demographics of Macau.) . 

Population
Mainland only: 1,338,612,968 (2009)
Hong Kong: 7,055,071 (2009)
Macau: 559,846 (2009)
Total: 1,346,227,885 (2009). 
Population rank: 1 (See List of countries by population.) . 

Urban-rural ratio
Urban: 49.68% (2010) — 665,570,000
Rural: 50.32% (2010) — 674,150,000 . 

Age structure

0–14 years: 16.60% (2011)
15–64 years: 72.1% (male 495,724,889/female 469,182,087) (2009) . 

Population growth rate
Population growth rate: 0.57% (2000-2010 average)
Natural increase rate: 6.06/1,000 population (2007) . 

Birth rate
Birth rate: 13.45 births/1,000 population (2007) . 

Death rate
Death rate: 7 deaths/1,000 population (2007) . 

Net migration rate
Net migration rate: -0.39 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2007) . 

Sex distribution
Sex distribution: male 51.27%; female 48.73% (2010) . 

Sex ratio
At birth: 1.133 male(s)/female (2011)
Under 15 years: 1.17 male(s)/female (2011)
15–64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female (2011)
65 years and over: 0.93 male(s)/female (2011)
Total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (2011) . 

Infant mortality rate
Total: 22.12 deaths/1,000 live births (2007)
Male: 20.01 deaths/1,000 live births (2007)
Female: 24.47 deaths/1,000 live births (2007) . 

See Infant mortality in China . 

Child mortality
415,000 children (under 16) died in China in 2006 (4.3 percent of the world total)[REF] . 

Life expectancy at birth
Total population: 73.69 years (2007)
Male:71.37 years (2007)
Female:75.18 years (2007) . 

Marriage and divorce
Marriage rate: 6.3/1,000 population (2006)
Divorce rate: 1.0/1,000 population (2006) . 

Literacy rate
Age 5 and over can read and write:

Total population: 95.92% (2010 census)
Male: 95.1% (2000 census)
Female: 86.5% (2000 census) . 

Educational attainment
As of 2000, percentage of population age 15 and over having: . 

no schooling and incomplete primary: 15.6%
completed primary: 35.7%
some secondary: 34.0%
complete secondary: 11.1%
some postsecondary through advanced degree: 3.6% . 

Religious affiliation

Predominantly: Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism, Ethnic minority religions and Ancestral worship. 
Others: Christianity (3% – 4%), Islam (1.5%), others. 
Note: State atheism, but traditionally pragmatic and eclectic. 

Sources:[REF][REF][REF][REF][REF][REF] . 

Major cities

. 

Only urban population stated (over 1 million people at least), as of 2005:

Shanghai 10,030,800
Beijing 7,699,300
Suzhou 6,521,300
Tianjin 4,933,100
Guangzhou 4,653,100
Wuhan 4,593,400
Chongqing 4,239,700
Shenyang 3,995,500
Nanjing 2,966,000
Harbin 2,735,100
Chengdu 2,664,000
Xi’an 2,657,900
Jinan 2,346,000
Changchun 2,283,800
Dalian 2,181,600
Hangzhou 2,059,800
Shijiazhuang 1,971,000
Taiyuan 1,970,300
Qingdao 1,930,200
Zhengzhou 1,770,800
Kunming 1,597,800
Lanzhou 1,576,400
Changsha 1,562,200
Xiamen 1,532,200. 

Households
Average household size: 3.10
Total households: 401,520,00
Of which are family households: 340,491,197 (96.9%)
Of which are collective households: 10,742,501 (3.1%) . 

HIV
See HIV/AIDS in China.
Adult population (ages 15–49) living with HIV: 0.15% (2008)
People living with HIV/AIDS: 100,000 (2008)
HIV/AIDS deaths: 44,000 (2003) . 

Causes of death
Major causes of death per 100,000 population, based on 2004 urban population samples: . 

malignant neoplasms (cancers): 119.7
cerebrovascular disease: 88.4
respiratory diseases: 78.1
heart diseases: 74.1
accidents, violence, and poisoning: 43.5 . 

Income
As of 2003, the distribution of urban household income: . 

Average per capita disposable income by quintile: Y 9,061 [U.S.$1,398]
first quintile: Y 3,285
second quintile: Y 5,377
third quintile: Y 7,279
fourth quintile: Y 9,763
fifth quintile: Y 17,431 . 

Working life
Quality of working life: . 

Average workweek: 40 hours (1998)
Annual rate per 100,000 workers for: (1997)
injury or accident: 0.7
industrial illness: 36
death: 1.4
Death toll from work accidents: 127,000 (2005)
Funds for pensions and social welfare relief: Y 26,668,000,000 (2001) . 

Access to services
Percentage of population having access to electricity (2000): 98.6%
Percentage of total population with safe public water supply (2002): 83.6% (urban, rural: 94.0%, 73.0%)
Sewage system (1999): total (urban, rural)
households with flush apparatus 20.7% (50.0%, 4.3%)
with pit latrines 69.3% (33.6%, 86.7%)
with no latrine 5.3% (7.8%, 4.1%) . 

Social participation
Eligible voters participating in last national election: n/a
Population participating in voluntary work: n/a
Trade union membership in total labor force (2005): 18%
Practicing religious population in total affiliated population: n/a . 

Social deviance
Annual reported arrest rate per 100,000 population (2006) for:

Property violation: 20.7
Infringing personal rights: 7.2
Disruption of social administration: 3.3
Endangering public security: 1.010 . 

Material wellbeing
Urban households possessing (number per household; 2003):

bicycles: 1.4
colour televisions: 1.3
washing machines: 0.9
refrigerators: 0.9
cameras: 0.5 . 

Rural families possessing (number per household; 2003):

bicycles: 1.2
colour televisions: 0.7
washing machines: 0.2
refrigerators: 0.1
cameras: 0.02 . 

Household income and expenditure
Average household size (2005) 3.1; rural households 3.3; urban households 3.0. 
Average annual per capita disposable income of household (2005): rural households Y 3,255 (U.S.$397), urban households Y 10,493 (U.S.$1,281). 
Sources of income (2003): rural households — income from household businesses 75.7%, wages 19.1%, transfers 3.7%, other 1.5%; urban households — wages 70.7%, transfers 23.3%, business income 4.5%, other 1.5%. 
Expenditure: rural (urban) households — food 45.6% (37.1%), housing 15.9% (10.7%), education and recreation 12.1% (14.4%), transportation and communications 8.4% (11.1%), clothing 5.7% (9.8%), medicine and medical service 6.0% (7.1%), household furnishings 4.2% (6.3%). 

Employment
Population economically active (2003): total 760,800,000. 
Activity rate of total population 58.9% (participation rates: over age 15 [2001] 77.7%; female [2001] 37.8%; registered unemployed in urban areas [December 2004] 4.2%). 
Urban employed workforce (2001): 239,400,000; by sector: state enterprises 76,400,000, collectives 28,130,000, self-employment or privately run enterprises 134,870,000. 
Rural employed workforce: 490,850,000.

The People's Republic of China (PRC) officially recognizes 56 distinct ethnic groups, the largest of which are Han, who constitute 91.51% of the total population in 2010. Ethnic minorities constitute 8.49% or 113.8 million of China's population in 2010. During the past decades ethnic minorities have experienced higher growth rates than the majority Han population, because they are not under the one-child policy. Their proportion of the population in China has grown from 6.1% in 1953, to 8.04% in 1990, 8.41% in 2000 and 8.49% in 2010. 
Large ethnic minorities (data according to the 2000 census) include the Zhuang (16 million, 1.28%), Manchu (10 million, 0.84%), Uyghur (9 million, 0.78%), Hui (9 million, 0.71%), Miao (8 million, 0.71%), Yi (7 million, 0.61%), Tujia (5.75 million, 0.63%), Mongols (5 million, 0.46%), Tibetan (5 million, 0.43%), Buyi (3 million, 0.23%), and Korean (2 million, 0.15%). 

Population of China according to ethnic group 1953-2010 [REF]
. |-bgcolor="#e0e0e0" Ethnicgroup Language family census 1953 census 1964 census 1982 census 1990 census 2000 census 2010
. |-bgcolor="#e0e0e0" Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % Number %
. |- Han Chinese 547,283,057 93.94 651,296,368 94.22 936,703,824 93.30 1,042,482,187 91.96 1,159,400,000 91.59 1,225,932,641 91.51
. |- Minority groups 35,320,360 6.06 39,883,909 5.78 67,233,254 6.70 91,200,314 8.04 106,430,000 8.41 113,792,211 8.49
. |- Zhuang Tai-Kadai 6,611,455 1.13 8,386,140 1.21 13,441,900 1.32 15,489,630 1.37 16,178,811 1.28 
. |- Manchu Tungusic 2,418,931 0.42 2,695,675 0.39 4,299,950 0.43 9,821,180 0.87 10,682,263 0.84 
. |- Hui Chinese 3,559,350 0.61 4,473,147 0.64 7,207,780 0.71 8,602,978 0.76 9,816,802 0.78 
. |- Miao Hmong-Mien 2,511,339 0.43 2,782,088 0.40 5,017,260 0.50 7,398,035 0.65 8,940,116 0.71 
. |- Uyghurs Altaic (Turkic) 3,640,125 0.62 3,996,311 0.58 5,917,030 0.59 7,214,431 0.64 8,399,393 0.66 
. |- Tujia Tibeto-Burman 284,900 0.03 5,704,223 0.50 8,028,133 0.63 
. |- Yi Tibeto-Burman 3,254,269 0.56 3,380,960 0.49 5,492,330 0.54 6,572,173 0.58 7,762,286 0.61 
. |- Mongols Altaic (Mongolic) 1,462,956 0.25 1,965,766 0.28 3,402,200 0.34 4,806,849 0.42 5,813,947 0.46 
. |- Tibetans Tibeto-Burman 2,775,622 0.48 2,501,174 0.36 3,821,950 0.38 4,593,330 0.41 5,416,021 0.43 
. |- Buyi Tai-Kadai 1,247,883 0.21 1,348,055 0.19 2,103,150 0.21 2,545,059 0.22 2,971,460 0.23 
. |- Korean Korean 1,120,405 0.19 1,339,569 0.19 1,783,150 0.18 1,920,597 0.17 1,923,842 0.15 
. |- Others 6,718,025 1.15 7,015,024 1.01 16,244,634 1.61 16,531,829 1.46 20,496,926 1.62 
. |-bgcolor="#e0e0e0" Total mainland China 582,603,417 694,581,759 1,008,175,288 1,133,682,501 1,265,830,000 1,339,724,852 . 

Neither Hong Kong nor Macau recognizes the official ethnic classifications maintained by the central government. In Macau the largest substantial ethnic groups of non-Chinese descent are the Macanese, of mixed Chinese and Portuguese descent (Eurasians), as well as migrants from the Philippines and Thailand. Overseas Filipinas working as domestic workers comprise the largest non-Han Chinese ethnic group in Hong Kong.

The 2010 Census counted 234,829 residents from Hong Kong, 21,201 residents from Macao, 170,283 residents from Taiwan, and 593,832 residents from other locations, totaling 1,020,145 residents [REF]. 

Nationality Residents
. |- South Korea 120,750
. |- United States 71,493
. |- Japan 66,159
. |- Burma 39,776
. |- Vietnam 36,205
. |- Canada 19,990
. |- France 15,087
. |- India 15,051
. |- Germany 14,446
. |- Australia 13,286
. |- Other countries 181,589 .

The official spoken standard in the People's Republic of China is Putonghua. Its pronunciation is based on the Beijing dialect of Mandarin, which was traditionally the formal version of the Mandarin or Chinese language. 

Other languages and dialects include other Mandarin dialects, and Wu (Shanghainese), Yue (Cantonese), Minbei (Fuzhou), Minnan (Hokkien or Taiwanese, Teochiu), Xiang, Gan and Hakka, as well as languages of the minorities. 

The seven major mutually unintelligible Chinese dialects, which are considered by some to be different languages of the Chinese language family, and by some others to be dialects of the Chinese language. Each of these dialects has many sub-dialects. Over 70% of the Han ethnic group are native speakers of the Mandarin group of dialects spoken in northern and southwestern China. The rest, concentrated in south and southeast China, speak one of the six other major Chinese dialects. In addition to the local dialect, nearly all also speak Standard Chinese or Mandarin (Putonghua), which pronunciation is based on the Beijing dialect, which inself is one of the Mandarin group of dialects, and is the language of instruction in all schools and is used for formal and official purposes. 

Non-Chinese languages spoken widely by ethnic minorities include Mongolian, Tibetan, Uyghur and other Turkic languages (in Xinjiang), Korean (in the northeast), and Vietnamese (in the southeast). 

In addition to Chinese, in the special administrative regions, English is an official language of Hong Kong and Portuguese is an official language of Macau. Patuá is a Portuguese creole spoken by a small number of Macanese. English, though not official, is widely used in Macau. In both of the special administrative regions, the dominant spoken form of Chinese is Cantonese. 

For written Chinese, the PRC officially uses simplified Chinese characters in mainland China, while traditional Chinese characters are used in Hong Kong and Macau. 

The de-facto spoken standard in Hong Kong and Macao is Cantonese, although officially it is just the Chinese language, not specifying which spoken form is standard. The written official standard in Hong Kong and Macao is Mandarin in traditional Chinese characters. 

On 1 January 1979, the PRC Government officially adopted the hanyu pinyin system for spelling Chinese names and places in mainland China in Roman letters. A system of romanization invented by the Chinese, pinyin has long been widely used in mainland China on street and commercial signs as well as in elementary Chinese textbooks as an aid in learning Chinese characters. Variations of pinyin also are used as the written forms of several minority languages. 

Pinyin replaced other conventional spellings in mainland China's English-language publications. The U.S. Government and United Nations also adopted the pinyin system for all names of people and places in mainland China. For example, the capital of the PRC is spelled "Beijing" rather than "Peking".

The Chinese government has implemented state atheism since 1949, which makes it difficult to ascertain data on the religious population figures. Thus making the relation between Government and religions was not smooth in the past. But in fact, the people are still holding private worship of traditional religions (Buddhism/Taoism) at home [REF]. In recent years, the Chinese government has opened up to religion, especially traditional religions such as Mahayana Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism because the Government also continued to emphasize the role of religion in building a "Harmonious Society," which was a positive development with regard to the Government's respect for religious freedom [REF]. 

According to the old Chinese government estimate, there were "over 100 million followers of various faiths" in China [REF]. Other estimates put about 100 million or about 8% Chinese who follow Buddhism, with the second largest religion as Taoism (no data), Islam (19 million or 1.5%) and Christianity (14 million or 1%; 4 million Roman Catholics and 10 million Protestants) [REF]. According to the 1993 edition of The Atlas of Religion, the number of atheists in China is between 10 and 14 percent [REF]. 

Additionally, the BBC reported in February 2007 that "a poll of 4,500 people by Shanghai university professors found 31.4% of people above the age of 16 considered themselves as religious", a figure that represents 300 million people [REF]. Among those surveyed, about 2/3 were "Buddhists, Taoists or worshipers of legendary figures such as the Dragon King and God of Fortune." Other religions represented significantly in that survey were Christianity (40 million) and Islam. China is also known to have small numbers of people who follow Hinduism, Dongbaism, Bon and a number of new religions and sects (particularly Xiantianism and Falun Gong). The official China Daily called the Shanghai professors' research "the country's first major survey on religious beliefs" [REF]. The Chinese government have accepted these new numbers. The wide disparity among these estimates underscores the difficulty of accurately surveying the religious view of a nation of over a billion people and the lack of reliable data. 

However, some surveys suggest that the cultural adherents or even outright religious adherents of Buddhism could number as high as 50% to 80% of the population, or about 660 million to over 1 billion [REF]. Some estimates for Taoism as high as 400 million or about 30% of the total population,[REF] but Adherents.com argues that these are actually numbers for Chinese folk religion or Chinese traditional religion, not Confucianism and Taoism themselves [REF]. 

The number of adherents to these religions can be overlaid in percentage due to the fact that mostly Chinese consider themselves both Buddhist and Taoist [REF]. However, it was difficult to estimate accurately the number of Buddhists because they did not have congregational memberships and often did not participate in public ceremonies [REF]. 

The minority religions are Christianity (between 40 million, 3%,[REF] and 54 million, 4%[REF]), Islam (20 million, 1.5%), Hinduism, Dongbaism, Bon and a number of new religions and sects (particularly Xiantianism and Falun Gong). 

According to the surveys of Phil Zuckerman on Adherents.com; in 1993, 59% (over 700 million)[REF] of the Chinese population was irreligious but in the newest survey (same author) in 2005, it was only 14% (over 180 million) [REF]. There are intrinsic logistical difficulties in trying to count the number of religious people anywhere, as well as difficulties peculiar to China. According to Phil Zuckerman, "low response rates," "non-random samples," and "adverse political/cultural climates" are all persistent problems in establishing accurate numbers of religious believers in a given locality [REF]. Similar difficulties arise in attempting to subdivide religious people into sects. These issues are especially pertinent in China for two reasons. First, it is a matter of current debate whether several important belief systems in China constitute "religions." As Daniel L. Overmeyer writes, in recent years there has been a "new appreciation..of the religious dimensions of Confucianism, both in its ritual activities and in the inward search for an ultimate source of moral order" [REF]. Many Chinese belief systems have concepts of a sacred and sometimes spiritual natural world yet do not always invoke a concept of personal god (with the exception of Heaven worship) [REF]. 

The constitution affirms religious toleration subject to several important restrictions. The government places limits on religious practice outside officially recognized organizations. Only two Christian organizations, a Catholic church without ties to the Holy See in Rome and the "Three-Self-Patriotic" Protestant church, are sanctioned by the PRC Government. Unauthorized churches have sprung up in many parts of the country, and unofficial religious practice is flourishing. In some regions authorities have tried to control activities of these unregistered churches. In other regions registered and unregistered groups are treated similarly by authorities, and congregates worship in both types of churches. On 20 July 1999, the Chinese authorities banned[REF] and initiated a crackdown[REF] on Falun Gong in mainland China. 

The Basic Law of Hong Kong protects freedom of religion as a fundamental right. There are a large variety of religious groups in the Hong Kong: Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism, Christianity including Catholicism, Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism and Judaism all have a considerable number of adherents. 

The Macau Basic Law similarly recognizes freedom of religion though the Religious Freedom Ordinance requires registration of religious organizations. The major religions practiced in Macau are Buddhism and traditional beliefs with a smaller minority claiming no religious belief. A small minority of Christians, mostly Catholic, exists.. 

Human population control is the practice of artificially altering the rate of growth of a human population. Historically, human population control has been implemented by limiting the population's birth rate, usually by government mandate, and has been undertaken as a response to factors including high or increasing levels of poverty, environmental concerns, religious reasons, and overpopulation. While population control can involve measures that improve people's lives by giving them greater control of their reproduction, some programs have exposed them to exploitation [REF]. 

Worldwide, the population control movement was active throughout the 1960s and 1970s, driving many reproductive health and family planning programs. In the 1980s, tension grew between population control advocates and women's health activists who advanced women's reproductive rights as part of a human rights-based approach [REF]. Growing opposition to the narrow population control focus led to a significant change in population control policies in the early 1990s [REF].

Population control may use one or more of the following practices although there are other methods as well: . 

contraception
abstinence
abortion
infanticide
emigration
decreasing immigration
sterilization
euthanasia
genocide . 

The method(s) chosen can be strongly influenced by the religious and cultural beliefs of community members. The failure of other methods of population control can lead to the use of abortion or infanticide as solutions. While a specific population control practice may be legal/mandated in one country, it may be illegal or restricted in another, indicative of the controversy surrounding this topic.

A number of ancient writers have reflected on the issue of population. At about 300 BCE in India, Kautilya, a political philosopher (c. 350-283 BCE), considered population as a source of political, economic, and military strength. Though a given region can house too many or too few people, he considered the latter possibility to be the greater evil. Kautilya favored the remarriage of widows (which at the time was forbidden in India), opposed taxes that encourage emigration, and believed that asceticism should be restricted to the aged [REF]. 

In ancient Greece, Plato (427-347 BCE) and Aristotle (384-322 BCE) discussed the best population size for Greek city states such as Sparta, and concluded that cities should be small enough for efficient administration and direct citizen participation in public affairs, but at the same time needed to be large enough to defend themselves against hostile neighboring city states. In order to maintain a desired population size, the philosophers advised that procreation, and if necessary, immigration, should be encouraged if the population size was too small. Emigration to colonies would be encouraged should the population become too large [REF]. Aristotle concluded that a large increase in population would bring, "certain poverty on the citizenry, and poverty is the cause of sedition and evil." To halt rapid population increase, Aristotle advocated the use of abortion and the exposure of newborns [REF]. 

Confucius (551-478 BCE) and other Chinese writers cautioned that, "excessive growth may reduce output per worker, repress levels of living for the masses and engender strife." Confucius also observed that, "mortality increases when food supply is insufficient; that permanent marriage makes for high infantile mortality rates, that war checks population growth."[REF] . 

Ancient Rome, especially in the time of Augustus (63 BCE- CE 14), needed manpower to acquire and administer the vast Roman Empire. A series of laws were instituted to encourage early marriage and frequent childbirth. Lex Julia (18 BCE) and the Lex Papia Poppaea (CE 9) are two well known examples of such laws, which among others, provided tax breaks and preferential treatment when applying for public office for those that complied with the laws. Severe limitations were imposed on those who did not. For example, the surviving spouse of a childless couple could only inherit one-tenth of the deceased fortune, while the rest was taken by the state. These laws encountered resistance from the population which led to the disregard of their provisions and to their eventual abolition [REF]. 

Tertullian, an early Christian author (ca. CE 160-220), was one of the first to describe famine and war as factors that can prevent overpopulation [REF]. He wrote: "The strongest witness is the vast population of the earth to which we are a burden and she scarcely can provide for our needs; as our demands grow greater, our complaints against Nature's inadequacy are heard by all. The scourges of pestilence, famine, wars and earthquakes have come to be regarded as a blessing to overcrowded nations, since they serve to prune away the luxuriant growth of the human race."[REF] . 

Ibn Khaldoun, a famous North African Arab polymath (1332–1406), considered population changes to be connected to economic development, linking high birth rates and low death rates to times of economic upswing, and low birth rates and high death rates to economic downswing. Khaldoun concluded that high population density rather than high absolute population numbers were desirable to achieve more efficient division of labour and cheap administration [REF]. 

During the Middle Ages in Christian Europe, population issues were rarely discussed in isolation. Attitudes were generally pro-natalist in line with the Biblical command, "Be ye fruitful and multiply."[REF] . 

The means of controlling and regulating populations can be traced back to many cultures. "Infanticide, or the killing of infants and young children, has occurred since early times. In early Rome, the father was given complete power to kill, abandon, or even sell his child. In Greek legend, Odepus was doomed to death until he was rescued by a family retainer. In Hawaii, China, and Japan, many female or disabled children were killed to maintain a strong race without overpopulation. Infanticide was practiced for many reasons. Like the Hawaiians, Chinese, and Japanese, some cultures saw the practice of infanticide as a means of controlling and regulating the population so that society's resources could be expended on the strongest and most valuable (Crosson, Cynthia)." .

European cities grew more rapidly than before, and throughout the 16th century and early 17th century discussions on the advantages and disadvantages of population growth were frequent [REF]. Niccolò Machiavelli, an Italian Renaissance political philosopher, wrote, "When every province of the world so teems with inhabitants that they can neither subsist where they are nor remove themselves elsewhere.. the world will purge itself in one or another of these three ways," listing floods, plague and famine [REF]. Martin Luther, a German monk and theologian (1483–1546), concluded on the issue, "God makes children. He is also going to feed them."[REF] . 

Jean Bodin, a French jurist and political philosopher (1530–1596), argued that a larger population would mean more production and in turn more export, which would increase the influx of silver and gold, and thus increase the riches of a country [REF]. Giovanni Botero, an Italian priest and diplomat (1540–1617), emphasized that, "the greatness of a city rests on the multitude of its inhabitants and their power," but pointed out that a population cannot increase beyond its food supply. If this limit was approached, late marriage, emigration, and war would serve to restore the balance [REF]. 

Richard Hakluyt, an English writer (1527–1616), observed that, "Throughe our longe peace and seldome sickness.. wee are growen more populous than ever heretofore;.. many thousandes of idle persons are within this realme, which, havinge no way to be sett on worke, be either mutinous and seeke alteration in the state, or at leaste very burdensome to the commonwealthe." Hakluyt believed that this led to crime and full jails and in A Discourse on Western Planting (1584), Hakluyt advocated for the emigration of the surplus population [REF]. With the onset of the Thirty Year War (1618–1648), characterized by widespread devastation and deaths brought on by hunger and disease in Europe, concerns about depopulation returned [REF].

In the 20th century, population control proponents have drawn from the insights of Thomas Malthus, a British clergyman and economist who published An Essay on the Principle of Population in 1798. Malthus argued that, "Population, when unchecked, increases in a geometrical ratio. Subsistence increases only in an arithmetical ratio." He also outlined the idea of "positive checks" and "preventative checks." "Positive checks," such as diseases, war, disaster and famine, are factors that Malthus considered to increase the death rate [REF]. 

"Preventative checks" were factors that Malthus believed to affect the birth rate such as moral restraint, abstinence and birth control [REF]. He predicted that "positive checks" on exponential population growth would ultimately save humanity from itself and that human misery was an "absolute necessary consequence."[REF] Malthus went on to explain why he believed that this misery affected the poor in a disproportionate manner. 

[There is a] constant effort towards an increase in population [which tends to] subject the lower classes of society to distress and to prevent any great permanent amelioration of their condition…The way in which these effects are produced seems to be this. We will suppose the means of subsistence in any country just equal to the easy support of its inhabitants. The constant effort towards population …increases the number of people before the means of subsistence are increased. The food, therefore which before supplied seven millions must now be divided among seven millions and half or eight millions. The poor consequently must live much worse, and many of them be reduced to severe distress [REF].

Finally, Malthus advocated for the education of the lower class about the use of "moral restraint," or voluntary abstinence, which he believed would slow the growth rate [REF]. 

Paul R. Ehrlich, a US biologist and environmentalist, published The Population Bomb in 1968, advocating stringent population control policies [REF]. His central argument on population is as follows: . 

A cancer is an uncontrolled multiplication of cells; the population explosion is an uncontrolled multiplication of people. Treating only the symptoms of cancer may make the victim more comfortable at first, but eventually he dies - often horribly. A similar fate awaits a world with a population explosion if only the symptoms are treated. We must shift our efforts from treatment of the symptoms to the cutting out of the cancer. The operation will demand many apparent brutal and heartless decisions. The pain may be intense. But the disease is so far advanced that only with radical surgery does the patient have a chance to survive [REF].

In his concluding chapter, Ehrlich offered a partial solution to the "population problem,"
"[We need] compulsory birth regulation.. [through] the addition of temporary sterilants to water supplies or staple food. Doses of the antidote would be carefully rationed by the government to produce the desired family size" [REF]. 

Ehrlich's views came to be accepted by many population control advocates in the United States and Europe in the 1960s and 1970s [REF]. Since Ehrlich introduced his idea of the "population bomb," overpopulation has been blamed for a variety of issues, including increasing poverty, high unemployment rates, environmental degradation, famine and genocide [REF]. In a 2004 interview, Ehrlich reviewed the predictions in his book, and found that while the specific dates within his predictions may have been wrong, his predictions about climate change and disease were valid. Ehrlich continued to advocate for population control and co-authored the book The Population Explosion, released in 1990 with his wife Anne Ehrlich. 

Paige Whaley Eager argues that the shift in perception that occurred in the 1960s must be understood in the context of the demographic changes that took place at the time [REF]. It was only in the first decade of the 19th century that the world's population reached one billion. The second billion was added in the 1930s, and the next billion in the 1960s. 90 percent of this net increase occurred in developing countries [REF]. Eager also argues that, at the time, the United States recognised that these demographic changes could significantly affect global geopolitics. Large increases occurred in China, Mexico and Nigeria, and demographers warned of a "population explosion," particularly in developing countries from the mid-1950s onwards [REF].

Opinions vary among economists about the effects of population change on a nation's economic health. Recent US scientific research concluded that the raising of a child costs about $16,000 yearly ($291,570 total for raising him/her up to his/her 18th birthday) [REF]. In the USA, the multiplication of this number with the yearly population growth will yield the overall cost of the population growth. Costs for other developed countries are usually of similar order of magnitude. 

While some believe that reduction of the population is a key to economic growth, others argue that population reduction should be focused on what they judge to be undesirable sections of the population (see Eugenics). Other economists doubt that a correlation between population reduction and economic growth exists. Some economists, such as Thomas Sowell[REF] and Walter E. Williams,[REF] have argued that poverty and famine are caused by bad government and bad economic policies, not by overpopulation. 

In his book, The Ultimate Resource, economist Julian Simon argued that higher population density leads to more specialization and technological innovation, which in turn leads to a higher standard of living. He claimed that human beings are the ultimate resource since we possess "productive and inventive minds that help find creative solutions to man’s problems, thus leaving us better off over the long run" [REF]. He also claimed that, "Our species is better off in just about every measurable material way."[REF] . 

Simon also claimed that if you considered a list of countries ranked in order by population density, there is no correlation between population density and poverty and starvation, and instead, if you considered a list of countries ranked in order by corruption within their respective governments, there is a significant correlation between government corruption and poverty and famine [REF].

It is generally accepted that overpopulation is aggravated by poverty and gender inequality with consequent unavailability, and lack of knowledge, of contraception. Third world evidence usually bears this theory out. However, first and second world fertility rates, in the Depression era United States, modern Russia, Japan, Italy, Sweden, Estonia and France suggest that these populations are responding inversely to poverty and economic pressures, especially on women [REF]. Thus, France is increasing social and women's services, like childcare and parental leave, expecting the policy to stop the aging of its population. Italy is regarded as alleviating overpopulation more rapidly than Sweden as a result of less gender equality and fewer children's services. 

Newer research has been done by the U.S. National Security Council, in a study entitled National Security Study Memorandum 200, under the direction of Henry Kissinger in 1974. This report stressed that only 13 countries are projected to account for 47 percent of the world population increase by the year 2050. This, it is argued, (due to its impact on development, food requirements, resources and the environment) adversely affected the welfare and progress of countries concerned. It further argued that this would undermine the stability of countries friendly to the US and therefore harm the "national security" of the US as well [REF]. 

David Pimentel, professor of ecology and agriculture at Cornell University, and Mario Giampietro, senior researcher at the National Research Institute on Food and Nutrition (INRAN), place in their study Food, Land, Population and the U.S. Economy the maximum U.S. population for a sustainable economy at 200 million. To achieve a sustainable economy and avert disaster, the United States must reduce its population by at least one-third, and world population will have to be reduced by two-thirds, says the study [REF].
A more recent study by Pimentel and colleagues (2010) suggests that the Earth can support a population of two billion individuals, but only if all individuals are willing to live at a European standard of living and use natural resources sustainably. These researchers state that reducing population from today's level of over 6.8 billion to the suggested 2 billion would take slightly longer than 100 years if every couple, worldwide, agrees to produce an average of only one child [REF]. 

Pimentel and Giampietro believe that agricultural crises will develop, but they will only begin to impact us after 2020, and will not become critical until 2050 [REF]. Geologist Dale Allen Pfeiffer claims that coming decades could see spiraling food prices without relief and massive starvation on a global level never experienced before [REF]. 

Another study has been done by the National Audubon Society which recently released a 16-page document called "Population and Habitat: Making the Connection." In this study, population control is widely supported [REF].

Population control is also increasingly being featured in many environmental documentaries and films. An example is The Planet-documentary, which describes the ongoing rising human population, its effects on the planet, and the necessity of population control. 

As early as 1798, Thomas Malthus stated in his Essay on the Principle of Population that population control needed to be implemented into society. Around the year 1900, Sir Francis Galton said in his publication called "Hereditary Improvement" that, "The unfit could become enemies to the State, if they continue to propagate." In 1968, Paul Ehrlich noted in The Population Bomb that, "We must cut the cancer of population growth," and that, "if this was not done, there would be only one other solution, namely the ‘death rate solution’ in which we raise the death rate through war-famine-pestilence etc.” . 

In the same year, another prominent modern advocate for mandatory population control was Garrett Hardin, who proposed in his landmark 1968 essay The Tragedy of the Commons that society must relinquish the "freedom to breed" through "mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon." Later on, in 1972, he reaffirmed his support in his new essay “Exploring New Ethics for Survival”, by stating that, “We are breeding ourselves into oblivion.” Many prominent personalities, such as Bertrand Russell, Margaret Sanger (1939), John D. Rockefeller, Frederick Osborn (1952), Isaac Asimov and Jacques Cousteau have also advocated for population control. 

Today, a number of influential people advocate population control. They are: . 

David Attenborough[REF]
Michael E. Arth[REF]
Jonathon Porritt, UK sustainable development commissioner[REF]
Sara Parkin[REF]
Crispin Tickell[REF] . 

The head of the UN Millennium Project Jeffrey Sachs is also a heavy proponent of decreasing the effects of overpopulation. In 2007, Jeffrey Sachs gave a number of lectures (2007 Reith Lectures) about population control and overpopulation. In his lectures, called "Bursting at the Seams", he featured an integrated approach that would deal with a number of problems associated with overpopulation and poverty reduction. For example, when criticized for advocating mosquito nets he argued that child survival was, "by far one of the most powerful ways," to achieve fertility reduction, as this would assure poor families that the smaller number of children they had would survive [REF].

The Roman Catholic Church has opposed abortion, sterilization, and contraception as a general practice, but specifically in regard to population control policies. Pope Benedict XVI has stated that "The extermination of millions of unborn children, in the name of the fight against poverty, actually constitutes the destruction of the poorest of all human beings" [REF].

The most significant modern population control system is China's one-child policy, in which, with various exceptions, having more than one child is discouraged. Unauthorized births are punished by fines, although there have also been allegations of illegal forced abortions and forced sterilization [REF]. 

The Chinese government introduced the policy in 1978 to alleviate the social and environmental problems of China [REF]. According to government officials, the policy has helped prevent 400 million births. The success of the policy has been questioned, and reduction in fertility has also been attributed to the modernization of China [REF]. The policy is controversial both within and outside of China because of the issues it raises, the manner in which the policy has been implemented and because of concerns about negative economic and social consequences.

Only those with two or fewer children are eligible for election to a Gram panchayat, or local government. 

We two, ours two ("Hum do, hamare do" in Hindi) is a slogan meaning one family, two children and is intended to reinforce the message of family planning thereby aiding population control.

Iran has succeeded in sharply reducing its birth rate in recent years. Iran is the only country where mandatory contraceptive courses are required for both males and females before a marriage license can be obtained. The government emphasizes the benefits of smaller families and the use of contraception [REF].

Enacted in 1970, Title X of the Public Health Service Act provides access to contraceptive services, supplies and information to those in need. Priority for services is given to people with low-incomes. The Title X Family Planning program is administered through the Office of Population Affairs under the Office of Public Health and Science. 
It is directed by the Office of Family Planning [REF]. In 2007, Congress appropriated roughly $283 million for family planning under Title X, at least 90 percent of which was used for services in family planning clinics [REF].
Title X is a vital source of funding for family planning clinics throughout the nation,[REF] which provide reproductive health care. 

The education and services supplied by the Title X-funded clinics support young individuals and low-income families. The goals of developing healthy families are accomplished by helping individuals and couples decide whether to have children and when the appropriate time to do so would be [REF]. 

Title X has made the prevention of unintended pregnancies possible [REF]. It has allowed millions of American women to receive necessary reproductive health care, plan their pregnancies and prevent abortions. Title X is dedicated exclusively to funding family planning and reproductive health care services [REF]. 

Title X as a percentage of total public funding to family planning client services has steadily declined from 44% of total expenditures in 1980 to 12% in 2006. Medicaid has increased from 20% to 71% in the same time. In 2006, Medicaid contributed $1.3 billion to public family planning [REF].An only child is a person with no siblings, either biological or adopted. In a family with multiple offspring, first-borns, may be briefly considered only children and have a similar early family environment, but the term only child is generally applied only to those individuals who never have siblings. An only child, however, may have half-siblings or step-siblings who come along considerably late (after they reach their teens) and still be considered an only child. Children with much older siblings (generally ten or more years) may also have a similar family environment to only children.

Throughout history, only children were relatively uncommon. Faced with declining birth rates, birth control, inflation, and a larger demand for the workforce, more families began to raise only children. In recent years, the number of families in the United States, Europe, and Japan choosing to have one child has increased considerably since the 1940s, coinciding with achieving equality in the workforce [REF]. After the Korean War ended in 1953, the South Korean government suggested citizens each have one or two children to boost economic prosperity, which resulted in significantly lowered birth rates and a larger number of only children to the country [REF]. Since 1979, the one-child policy in mainland China has restricted most parents to having an only child, although it is subject to local relaxations and individual circumstances [REF]. 

Families may have an only child for a variety of reasons, including: personal preference, family planning, financial and emotional or physical health issues, desire to travel, stress in the family, educational advantages, late marriage, stability, focus, time constraints, fears over pregnancy, advanced age, infertility, divorce, and death of a sibling or parent.

Only children are often subject to a stereotype that equates them with spoiled brats in Western countries. G. Stanley Hall was one of the first experts to give only children a bad reputation when he referred to their situation as "a disease in itself." Even today, only children are commonly stereotyped as "spoiled, selfish, and bratty."[REF] While only children receive unlimited time for development and resources, there's no confirmation they are overindulged or considerably differ from children with siblings [REF]. Susan Newman, a social psychologist at Rutgers University and the author of Parenting an Only Child, says that this is a myth. "People articulate that only children are spoiled, they're aggressive, they're bossy, they're lonely, they're maladjusted," she said. "There have been hundreds and hundreds of research studies that show that only children are no different from their peers."[REF] Similarly, a popular belief is held that only children have aversive social skills, and therefore a harder time making friends. Based on a 2004 study of American middle and high school students, such beliefs were confirmed false [REF]. 

In China, perceived behavioral problems in single children may be disparagingly called Little Emperor Syndrome[REF] and the lack of siblings has been blamed for a number of social ills such as materialism and crime. However, recent studies do not support these claims, and show no significant differences in personality between singletons and children in larger families [REF]. The one child policy has also been speculated to be the underlying cause of forced abortions, female infanticide, underreporting[REF] of female births, and has been suggested as a possible cause behind China's increasing number of crimes and gender imbalance. Despite this, a 2008 survey given by the Pew Research Center reports that 76% of the Chinese population supports the policy [REF]. 

Popular media often posits that it is more difficult for only children to cooperate in a conventional family environment, as they have no competitors for their parents and family. It is suggested that confusion arises about the norms of ages and roles and that a similar effect exists in understanding during relationships with other peers and youth, all throughout life [REF]. Furthermore, it is suggested that many feel that their parents place extra pressure and expectations as the single child of the family. Often, only children are perfectionists [REF]. Only children are noted to have a tendency to mature faster [REF].

A 1987 quantitative review of 141 studies on 16 different personality traits contradicts the opinion, held by theorists including Alfred Adler, that only children feel maladjusted due to pampering [REF]. The study found no evidence of any maladjustment in only children. The most important finding was that only children are not very different from children with siblings. The main exception to this was the finding that only children are higher in achievement motivation, largely because their greater share of parental attention translates into increased parental scrutiny: This scrutiny, especially as compounded by only children's access to a greater share of parental resources, exposes them to greater absolute quantities of both reward when they exceed parental expectations and punishment when they fall short [REF]. A second analysis revealed that only children, first-borns, and children with only one sibling score higher on tests of verbal ability than later-borns and children with multiple siblings [REF]. 

The advantage of only children in test scores and achievement motivation may be due to the greater amount of parental attention they receive. According to the Resource Dilution Model, parental resources (e.g. time to read to the child) are important in development. Because these resources are finite, children with many siblings receive fewer resources [REF]. 

In his book Maybe One, Bill McKibben argues in favor of a one child policy based on this research. He argues that most cultural stereotypes are false, that there are not many differences between only children and other children, and where there are differences, they are favorable to the only child. Aside from scoring significantly better in achievement motivation, only children score significantly better in personal adjustment to new situations. Only children are also more likely to make outside friends, whereas children with siblings tend to be "more parochial and limited in their understanding of a variety of social roles",[REF] but it is usually more difficult for them to do so, even in early life [REF]. Traits such as self-control, interpersonal skills, and emotional control have been observed to vary much more noticeably among only children [REF]. 

Most research on only children has been quantitative and focused on the behaviour of only-children and on how others, for example teachers, assess that behaviour. Bernice Sorensen, in contrast, used qualitative methods in order to elicit meaning and to discover what only-children themselves understand, feel or sense about their lives that are lived without siblings. Her research showed that during their life span only children often become more aware of their only child status and are very much affected by society's stereotype of the only-child whether or not the stereotype is true or false. She argues in her book, Only Child Experience and Adulthood, that growing up in a predominantly sibling society affects only children and that their lack of sibling relationships can have an important effect on both the way they see themselves and others and how they interact with the world [REF].

Many contemporary personality theorists believe that the "big five personality traits" (also known as Five Factor Model) represent a natural taxonomy of human personality variables. Across different languages, the vast majority of adjectives used to describe human personality fit into one of the following five areas, easily remembered by the acronym OCEAN: Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. Factor analyses of personality tests also tend to cluster around these five factors. 

In his book Born to Rebel, Frank Sulloway provides evidence that birth order influences the development of Big Five personality traits. Sulloway suggests that firstborns and only children are more conscientious, more socially dominant, less agreeable, and less open to new ideas compared to laterborns [REF]. However, his conclusions have been challenged by other researchers,[REF] who argue that birth order effects are weak and inconsistent. In one of the largest studies conducted on the effect of birth order on the Big Five, data from a national sample of 9,664 subjects found no association between birth order and scores on the NEO PI-R personality test [REF].. 

According to the Encyclopedia of International Development, the term demographic trap is used by demographers "to describe the combination of high fertility (birth rates) and declining mortality (death rates) in developing countries, resulting in a period of high population growth rate (PGR)."[REF] High fertility combined with declining mortality happens when a developing country moves through the demographic transition of becoming developed. 

During "stage 2" of the demographic transition, quality of health care improves and death rates fall, but birth rates still remain high, resulting in a period of high population growth [REF]. The term "demographic trap" is used by some demographers to describe a situation where stage 2 persists because "falling living standards reinforce the prevailing high fertility, which in turn reinforces the decline in living standards."[REF] This results in more poverty, where people rely on more children to provide them with economic security. Social scientist John Avery explains that this results because the high birth rates and low death rates "lead to population growth so rapid that the development that could have slowed population is impossible."[REF] .

One of the significant outcomes of the "demographic trap" is explosive population growth. This is currently seen throughout Asia, Africa and Latin America, where death rates have dropped during the last half of the 20th century due to advanced health care. However, in subsequent decades most of those countries were unable to keep improving economic development to match their population's growth: by filling the education needs for more school age children; creating more jobs for the expanding workforce; and providing basic infrastructure and services, such as sewage, roads, bridges, water supplies, electricity, and stable food supplies [REF]. 

A possible result of a country remaining trapped in stage 2 is its government may reach a state of "demographic fatigue," writes Donald Kaufman. In this condition, the government will lack financial resources to stabilize its population's growth and becomes unable to deal effectively with threats from natural disasters, such as hurricanes, floods, landslides, drought, and disease. According to Kaufman, many countries suffering from "demographic fatigue" will slip back into stage 1, resulting in both high fertility and high mortality rates. "If they do," he states, "these countries may soon reach zero population growth, but at a terrible price." He gives the example of Zimbabwe, where 26 percent of the adult population has AIDS and the average person has a life expectancy of only 40 years [REF]. 

Environmentalist Lester Brown notes that 16 of the 20 countries designated as "failed states" in 2010
were caught in this demographic trap, and would most likely be unable to break out of it on their own. Brown describes Sudan as a "classic case" of a country caught in the demographic trap:

"It has developed far enough economically and socially to reduce mortality, but not far enough to quickly reduce fertility. As a result, women on average have four children, double the two needed for replacement, and the population of 41 million is growing by over 2,000 per day. Under this pressure, Sudan—like scores of other countries—is breaking down."[REF] . 

Examples of developing nations and territories that successfully went from stage 2 to stage 3 are South Korea and Taiwan, which were able to move toward smaller families, and thereby improved living standards. This resulted in further reduction in fertility rates.

The existence of the "trap" is controversial. Some demographers see it as only a temporary problem, which can be eliminated with better education and better "family planning." While others consider the "trap" more of a longer-term symptom of the failure to educate children and provide safety nets against poverty, resulting in more families seeing children as a form of "securing incomes" for the future [REF]. Nonetheless, many social scientists agree that family planning should be an important part of public health and economic development [REF].

Gaza Strip
Yemen
Egypt[REF] .. 

Family planning is the planning of when to have children,[REF] and the use of birth control[REF][REF] and other techniques to implement such plans. Other techniques commonly used include sexuality education,[REF][REF] prevention and management of sexually transmitted infections,[REF] pre-conception counseling[REF] and management, and infertility management [REF]. 

Family planning is sometimes used as a synonym for the use of birth control, however, it often includes a wide variety of methods, and practices that are not birth control. It is most usually applied to a female-male couple who wish to limit the number of children they have and/or to control the timing of pregnancy (also known as spacing children). Family planning may encompass sterilization, as well as abortion [REF]. 

Family planning services are defined as "educational, comprehensive medical or social activities which enable individuals, including minors, to determine freely the number and spacing of their children and to select the means by which this may be achieved."[REF] .

Raising a child requires significant amounts of resources: time,[REF] social, financial,[REF] and environmental. 
Planning can help assure that resources are available. The purpose of family planning is to make sure that any couple, man or woman who has the desire to have a child has the resources that are needed in order to complete this goal [REF]. With these resources a couple, man or women can explore the options of natural birth, surrogacy, artificial insemination or adoption. In the other case, if the person does not wish to have a child at the specific time, they can investigate the resources that are needed to prevent pregnancy, such as birth control, contraceptives, or physical protection and prevention.

Waiting until the mother is at least 18 years old before trying to have children improves maternal and child health [REF].
Also, if additional children are desired after a child is born, it is healthier for the mother and the child to wait at least 2 years after the previous birth before attempting to conceive (but not more than 5 years) [REF]. After a miscarriage or abortion, it is healthier to wait at least 6 months [REF]. 

"Family planning benefits the health and well-being of women and families throughout the world. Using contraception can help to avoid unwanted pregnancies and space births; protect against STDs, including HIV/AIDS; and provide other health benefits."[REF] .

Some families use modern medical advances in family planning. For example in surrogacy treatments a woman agrees to become pregnant and deliver a child for another couple or person. 

In sperm donations, pregnancies are usually achieved using donated sperm by artificial insemination (either by intracervical insemination or intrauterine insemination) and less commonly by in vitro fertilization (IVF), usually known in this context as Assisted reproductive technology (ART), but insemination may also be achieved by a donor having sexual intercourse with a woman for the sole purpose of initiating conception. This method is known as natural insemination (NI). 

There is generally a demand for sperm donors who have no genetic problems in their family, 20/20 eyesight, with excellent visual acuity, a college degree, and sometimes a value on a certain height and age [REF]. 

In cases were couples may not want to have children just yet and plan with time family planning programs help alot. Federal family planning programs reduced childbearing among poor women by as much as 29 percent, according to a University of Michigan study [REF].

Family planning is among the most cost-effective of all health interventions [REF]. "The cost savings stem from a reduction in unintended pregnancy, as well as a reduction in transmission of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV."[REF] . 

Childbirth and prenatal health care cost averaged $7,090 for normal delivery in the US in 1996 [REF]. US Department of Agriculture estimates that for a child born in 2007, a US family will spend an average of $11,000 to $23,000 per year for the first 17 years of child's life [REF]. (Total inflation adjusted estimated expenditure: $196,000 to $393,000, depending on household income.)[REF] .

Birth control is techniques used to prevent unwanted pregnancy. 

There are a range of contraceptive methods, each with unique advantages and disadvantages. Any of the widely recognized methods of birth control is much more effective than no method. Behavioral methods that include intercourse, such as withdrawal and calendar based methods have little up front cost and are readily available, but are much less effective in typical use than most other methods. Long-acting reversible contraceptive methods, such as IUD and implant are highly effective and convenient, requiring little user action. When cost of failure is included, IUDs and vasectomy are much less costly than other methods. 
In addition to providing birth control, male or female condoms protect against sexually transmitted diseases (STD). Condoms may be used alone, or in addition to other methods, as backup or to prevent STD. Surgical methods (tubal ligation, vasectomy) provide long term contraception for those who have completed their families.

The world's largest international source of funding for population and reproductive health programs is the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). The main goals of the International Conference on Population and Development Program of Action are: . 

Universal access to reproductive health services by 2015
Universal primary education and closing the gender gap in education by 2015
Reducing maternal mortality by 75% by 2015
Reducing infant mortality
Increasing life expectancy
Reducing HIV infection rates in persons aged 15–24 years by 25% in the most-affected countries by 2005, and by 25% globally by 2010 . 

The World health organization (WHO) and World Bank estimate that $3.00 per person per year would provide basic family planning, maternal and neonatal health care to women in developing countries. This would include contraception, prenatal, delivery and post-natal care in addition to postpartum family planning and the promotion of condoms to prevent sexually transmitted infections [REF].

China's one-child policy forces couples to have no more than one child. Beginning in 1979, [REF] the policy was instated to control the rapid population growth that was occurring in the nation at this time. WIth the rapid change in population, China was facing many impacts of the rapid population growth including poverty and homelessness. As a developing nation, the Chinese government was concerned that a continuation of the rapid population growth that had been occurring would hinder their development as a nation. The process of family planning varied throughout China, as many different people differed in their responsiveness to the one child policy, based on location and socioeconomic status. For example, many families in the cities accepted this policy more readily based on the lack of space, money, and resources that are often offered in the cities. However, the people in rural areas of China were more hesitant in accepting this policy. Since the policy was put into place in 1979, over 400 million births have been prevented in China [REF]. China's population policy has been credited with a very significant slowing of China's population growth which had been higher before the policy was implemented. However, it has come under criticism that the policy has created abuse for women in China. Often times implementation of the policy has involved forced abortions and forced sterilization. However, while the punishment of "unplanned" pregnancy is a large fine, both forced abortion and forced sterilization can be charged with intentional assault, which is punished with up to 10 years' imprisonment. 

Another aspect of family planning in China due to the one-child policy is the differentiation between the desire for male and female children in both urban and rural locations. In the Chinese culture, the desire for a male child is much harder, making the abandonment or abortion of female infants or fetuses common in the rural areas of the nation [REF]. Another issue that is raised in the one-child policy in China is the information in regards to naturally giving birth to twins or triplets. If this situation arises, the family is allowed to keep the children because of the natural causes of this impregnation.

In Hong Kong, the Eugenics League was found in 1936, which became The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong in 1950 [REF]. The organisation provides family planning advice, sex education, birth control services to the general public of Hong Kong. In the 1970s, due to the rapidly rising population, it launched the "Two is Enough" campaign,[REF] which reduced the general birth rate through educational means. 

The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong, Hong Kong's national family planning association,[REF] founded the International Planned Parenthood Federation with its counterparts in seven other countries [REF].

The sale of contraceptives was illegal in Ireland from 1935 until 1980, when it was legalized with strong restrictions, later loosened. It has been argued that the resulting demographic dividend played a role in the economic boom in Ireland in the 1990s (the Celtic tiger) was in part due to the legalization of contraception in 1979 and subsequent decline in the fertility rate [REF]. In Ireland the ratio of workers to dependents improved due to lower fertility but was raised further by increased female labor market participation.

In agreement with the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, Pakistan pledged that by 2010 it would provide universal access to family planning. Additionally, Pakistan’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper has set specific national goals for increases in family planning and contraceptive use [REF].

According to a 2004 study, current pregnancies were termed "desired and timely" by 58% of respondents, while 23% described them as "desired, but untimely", and 19% said they were "undesired". As of 2004, the share of women of reproductive age using hormonal or intrauterine birth control methods was about 46% (29% intrauterine, 17% hormonal) [REF]. During the soviet era high quality contraceptives were difficult to obtain, and abortion became the most common way of preventing unwanted births. Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union abortion rates have fallen considerably, but they are still higher than rates in many developed countries.

Contraception has been available for free under the National Health Service since 1974, and 74% of reproductive age women use some form of contraception [REF]. The levonorgestrel intrauterine system has been massively popular [REF]. Sterilization is popular in older age groups, among those 45-49, 29% of men and 21% of women have been sterilized [REF]. Female sterilization has been declining since 1996, when the intrauterine system was introduced [REF]. Emergency contraception has been available since the 1970s, a product was specifically licensed for emergency contraception in 1984, and emergency contraceptives became available over the counter in 2001 [REF]. Since becoming available over the counter it has not reduced the use of other forms of contraception, as some moralists feared it might [REF]. In any year only 5% of women of childbearing age use emergency hormonal contraception [REF]. 

Despite widespread availability of contraceptives, almost half of pregnancies were unintended circa 2005 [REF]. Abortion was legalized in 1967 [REF].

Despite the availability of highly effective contraceptives, about half of US pregnancies are unintended [REF]. Highly effective contraceptives, such as IUD are underused in the United States [REF]. Increasing use of highly effective contraceptives could help meet the goal set forward in Healthy People 2020 to decrease unintended pregnancy by 10% [REF]. Cost to the user is one factor preventing many US women from using more effective contraceptives [REF]. Making contraceptives available without a copay increases use of highly effective methods, reduces unintended pregnancies, and may be instrumental in achieving the Healthy People 2020 goal [REF]. 

Teenage pregnancies are very involved in today's society and because of this the resources that are around for family planning is vital to the survival of these infants. Federally funded programs such as Planned Parenthood are very important in the family planning process of adolescents because of the involvement of doctors, gynecologists, or medicine. These family planning practices also help impact the teenager and the infant because of the availability of healthcare and other resources that may otherwise not be offered [REF]. 

In the United States, contraceptive use saves about $19 billion in direct medical costs each year [REF]. Title X of the Public Health Service Act,[REF] is a US government program dedicated to providing family planning services for those in need. But funding for Title X as a percentage of total public funding to family planning client services has steadily declined from 44% of total expenditures in 1980 to 12% in 2006. Medicaid has increased from 20% to 71% in the same time. In 2006, Medicaid contributed $1.3 billion to public family planning [REF]. The 1.9 billion spent on publicly funded family planning in 2008 saved an estimated $7 billion in short term Medicaid costs [REF]. Such services helped women prevent an estimated 1.94 million unintended pregnancies and 810,000 abortions [REF].

The 26th of September is World Contraception Day, devoted to raising awareness of contraception and improving education about sexual and reproductive health, with a vision of a world where every pregnancy is wanted.[REF] It is supported by a group of international NGOs, including 
Asian Pacific Council on Contraception, Centro Latinamericano Salud y Mujer, European Society of Contraception and Reproductive Health, German Foundation for World Population, International Federation of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, International Planned Parenthood Federation, Marie Stopes International, Population Services International, The Population Council, 
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Women Deliver [REF].The phenomenon of the missing women of Asia is a shortfall in the number of women in Asia relative to the number that would be expected if there was no sex-selective abortion or female infanticide or if the newborn of both sexes received similar levels of health care and nutrition. 

The phenomenon was first noted by the Indian, Nobel Prize–winning economist Amartya Sen in an essay in The New York Review of Books in 1990,[REF] and expanded upon in his subsequent academic work. Sen originally estimated that more than a 100 million women were "missing" (in the sense that their potential existence had been eliminated either through sex selective abortion, infanticide or inadequate nutrition during infancy). 

Originally some other economists, notably Emily Oster, questioned Sen's explanation, and argued that the shortfall was due to higher prevalence of the hepatitis B virus in Asia compared to Europe. Further research however, has established that the prevalence of hepatitis B cannot account for more than an insignificant fraction of the missing women."[REF] As a result, Sen's explanation for the phenomenon is still the most accepted one. 

Research conducted by [REF] and others has identified a number of societal factors responsible for the elimination of females phenomenon [REF].

According to Sen, women allegedly make up the majority of the world's population, even though this is not the case throughout every country. While there are typically more women than men in European and North American countries (at around 0.98 to 1 for most of them), the sex ratio of developing countries in Asia, as well as the Middle East, is much lower. This runs contrary to research that females tend to have better survival rates than males, given the same amount of nutritional and medical attention [REF]. In China, the ratio of men to women is 1.06, far higher than most countries. Translating this into an actual number means that in China alone there are 50 million women "missing" - that should be there but are not. Adding up similar numbers from South and West Asia results in a number of "missing" women higher than 100 million [REF]. According to Sen, "These numbers tell us, quietly, a terrible story of inequality and neglect leading to the excess mortality of women."[REF] .

In her PhD dissertation at Harvard, Emily Oster argued that Sen's hypothesis did not take account of the different rates of prevalence of the Hepatitis B virus between Asia and other parts of the world [REF]. Regions with higher rates of Hep B infection tend to have higher ratios of male to female births for biological reasons which are not yet well understood, but which have been extensively documented. 

While the disease is fairly uncommon in US and Europe, it is endemic in China and very common in other parts of Asia. Oster argued that this difference in disease prevalence could account for about 45% of the supposed "missing women", and even as high as 75% of the ones in China. Furthermore, Oster showed that the introduction of a Hepatitis B vaccine had a lagged effect of equalizing the gender ratio towards what one would expect if other factors did not play a role [REF]. 

Oster later dismissed her own hypothesis (see below), asserting Hepatitis B plays no role in forming gender ratio.

Oster's challenge was met with counter arguments of its own as researchers tried to sort out the available data and control for other possible conflating factors. Avraham Ebenstein questioned Oster's conclusion based on the fact that among first born children the sex ratio is close to the natural one. It is the skewed female-male ratios among second and third born children that account for the bulk of the disparity. In other words, if Hepatitis B was responsible for the skewed ratio then one would expect it to be true among all children, regardless of birth order. 

However, the fact that the skewness arose only among the later born but not as much among the first born children, suggested that factors other than the disease were involved [REF]. 

Das Gupta pointed out that the female-male ratio changed in relation to average household income in a way that was consistent with Sen's hypothesis but not Oster's. In particular, lower household income eventually leads to a higher boy/girl ratio. Furthermore Das Gupta documented that the gender birth order was significantly different conditional on the sex of the first child. 

If the first child was male, then the sex of the subsequent children tended to follow the regular, biologically determined sex pattern (boys born with probability .512, girls born with probability .488). However, if the first child was female, the subsequent children had a much higher probability of being male, indicating that conscious parental choice was involved in determining the sex of the child. Neither of these phenomena can be explained by the prevalence of Hepatitis B. 

They are however consistent with Sen's contention that it is purposeful human action - in the form of selective abortion and perhaps even infanticide and female infant neglect - that is the cause of the skewed gender ratio [REF].

Part of the difficulty in discerning between the two competing hypotheses was the fact that while the link between Hepatitis B and a higher likelihood of male birth had been documented, there was little information available on the strength of this link and how it varied by which of the parents were the carriers. Furthermore most prior medical studies did not use a sufficiently high number of observations to convincingly estimate the magnitude of the relationship. 

However, in a 2008 study published in the American Economic Review, Lin and Luoh utilized data on almost 3 million births in Taiwan over a long period of time and found that the effect of maternal Hepatitis B infection on the probability of male birth was very small, about one quarter of one percent [REF]. This meant that the rates of Hepatitis B infection among mothers could not account for the missing women. 

The remaining possibility was that it was the infection among fathers that could lead to a skewed birth ratio. However, Oster, together with Chen, Yu and Lin, in a follow up study to Lin and Luoh examined a data set of 67,000 births (15% of whom were Hepatitis B carriers) and found no effect of infection on birth ratio for either the mothers or fathers. As a result Oster retracted her earlier hypothesis [REF]. This retraction was praised by the John Bates Clark Medal winner and Freakonomics author Steven Levitt for its honesty [REF].

Das Gupta observed that the preference for boys and the resulting shortage of girls was even more pronounced in the more highly developed Haryana and Punjab regions of India than in poorer areas, and also the high prevalence of this prejudice among the more educated and affluent women (mothers) there. Contrary to the conventional wisdom expectations, in India there are more missing women in developed urban areas, than in backward rural regions. The bias against girls is very evident among the relatively highly developed, middle-class dominated nations (Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia) and the immigrant Asian communities in the United States and Britain. Only recently and in some countries (particularly South Korea) have the development and educational campaigns begun to turn the tide, resulting in more normal gender ratios [REF]. 

According to Das Gupta's research done in Punjab in the 1980s, girls were not receiving inferior treatment if a girl was born as a first child in a given family, when the parents still had high hopes for obtaining a son later. Subsequent births of girls were however unwelcome, because each such birth diminished a chance of the family having a son. The more affluent and educated women would have fewer offspring, and therefore were under more acute pressure to produce a son as early as possible. As ultrasound imaging and other techniques increasingly allow early prediction of the child's sex, the more affluent families opt for an abortion, or if a girl is born, decrease her chance of survival by, for example, not providing sufficient medical care [REF]. 

One reason for parents, even mothers, to avoid daughters is the traditional patriarchal culture in the countries where the elimination of females takes place. As parents grow older they can expect much more help and support from their independent sons, than from daughters, who after getting married become in a sense property of their husbands' families, and, even if educated and generating significant income, have limited ability to interact with their natal families. Women are also often practically unable to inherit real estate, so a mother-widow will lose her family's (in reality her late husband's) plot of land and become indigent if she had had only daughters. Poor rural families have meager resources to distribute among their children, which reduces the opportunity to discriminate against girls [REF].

Some research has also noted that in the mid-1990s a reverse began in the observed trends in the regions of Asia where originally the male/female ratios were high. In line with the studies of Das Gupta described above, as income increases the bias in the sex ratio towards boys decreases. 

With high per capita income growth in many parts of India and China during the late 1990s and the 2000s, male/female ratios have began shifting towards "normal" levels [REF]. However, for India and China, this appears to be due to a fall in adult female mortality rates, relative to male adults, rather than a change in the sex ratio among children and newborns. 

A different development occurred in South Korea which in the early 1990s had one of the highest male to female ratios in the world. By 2007 however, South Korea, had a male to female ratio comparable to that found in Western Europe, US and Sub Saharan Africa. 

This development characterized both adult ratios as well as the ratios among new births. According to Chung and Das Gupta rapid economic growth and development in South Korea has led to a sweeping change in social attitudes and reduced the preference for sons [REF]. Das Gupta, Chung, and Shuzhuo conclude that it is possible that China and India will experience a similar reversal in trend towards normal sex ratio in the near future if their rapid economic development, combined with policies that seek to promote gender equality, continue [REF]. This reversal has been interpreted as the latest phase of a more complex cycle called the "sex ratio transition" [REF].The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong (FPAHK) is a voluntary organisation that promotes family planning in Hong Kong. The current CEO is Peggy Lam.

The association was founded in 1936 as the Hong Kong Eugenics League (香港優生學會). In 1950, it changed its name officially to the Family Planning Association of Hong Kong. It became one of the founding members of the International Planned Parenthood Federation in 1952. At the beginning, FPAHK used individual contacts to do its task, spreading the Family Planning message. Subsequently, it started a clinic service. In 1956, it set up the first subfertility clinic. In 1955, the Hong Kong government began subsidising FPAHKs activities. From 1964 on, FPAHK received financial support by the International Planned Parenthood Federation. In 1967, FPAHK ran the first Hong Kong Family Planning Knowledge, Attitude & Practice (KAP) Survey (「香港家庭計劃知識、態度及實行調查」) and started sex education. 

Soon after, the Hong Kong Department of Health started to take over the FPAHK sub-fertility clinics. At the same time, FPAHK started its "Two is enough" (「兩個夠哂數」) campaign. To further publicise its campaign, FPAHK made a poster of artist Petrina Fung playing with her kids, with the caption "No need for lots of babies, have two at most". 

In 1986, FPAHK began to diversify its services and research with the establishment of the first health centre for teenagers at Causeway Bay. In 1989, FPAHK's new headquarters at Wanchai Southorn Centre began operations. After that, FPAHK pushed through a new artificial insemination service, the family planning awareness initiative, a one-stop service for premarital couples, an obstetric examination service, the experimental hormone replacement therapy plan, and initiated the Hong Kong Women's Reproductive and Sexual Health Advocacy Group (香港婦女生殖與性健康倡議組織). The "Be a Mr. Able in Family Planning" (「家庭計劃，要做得哥」) campaign was launched to entice men to play an active role in birth control. In 1998, FPAHK began to provide a mobile clinic service. In 1999, the mobile library and menopause clinic service started. In 11 December 2006, the FPAHK's office at Tsuen Wan Centre began operation [REF].The Voluntary Human Extinction Movement (VHEMTVHEMT is pronounced "vehement",[REF] because, according to Knight, that is what they are [REF].) is an environmental movement that calls for all people to abstain from reproduction to cause the gradual voluntary extinction of humankind. VHEMT supports human extinction primarily because, in the group's view, it would prevent environmental degradation. The group states that a decrease in the human population would prevent a significant amount of man-made human suffering. The extinctions of non-human species and the scarcity of resources required by humans are frequently cited by the group as evidence of the harm caused by human overpopulation. 

VHEMT was founded in 1991 by Les U. Knight, an American activist who became involved in the environmental movement in the 1970s and thereafter concluded that human extinction was the best solution to the problems facing the Earth's biosphere and humanity. Knight publishes the group's newsletter and serves as its spokesperson. Although the group is promoted by a website and represented at some environmental events, it relies heavily on coverage from outside media to spread its message. Many commentators view its platform as unacceptably extreme, though other writers have applauded VHEMT's perspective. In response to VHEMT, some journalists and academics have argued that humans can develop sustainable lifestyles or can reduce their population to sustainable levels. Others maintain that, whatever the merits of the idea, because of the human reproductive drive humankind will never voluntarily seek extinction.

The Voluntary Human Extinction Movement was founded by Les U. Knight,[REF][REF]Knight denies that he is the founder, saying that "I’m not the founder of VHEMT, I just gave it a name."[REF] a secondary school substitute teacher who lives in Portland, Oregon [REF]. Although he was raised in a large family,[REF] after becoming involved in the environmental movement as a college student in the 1970s, Knight attributed most of the dangers faced by the planet to human overpopulation. After coming to this conclusion, he joined the Zero Population Growth organization[REF] and chose to be vasectomised at age 25 [REF]. He later concluded that the extinction of humanity would be the best solution to the Earth's environmental problems [REF]. He believes that this idea has also been held by some people throughout human history. 

In 1991, Knight began publishing VHEMT's newsletter,[REF] known as These Exit Times [REF]. In the newsletter, he asked readers to further human extinction by not procreating [REF]. VHEMT has also published cartoons,[REF] including a comic strip titled "Bonobo Baby", featuring a woman who forgoes childbearing in favor of adopting a bonobo [REF]. In 1996, Knight created a website for VHEMT; it was available in 11 languages by 2010. VHEMT's logo features the letter "V" (for voluntary) and an inverted Earth (i.e., with north at the bottom) [REF].VHEMT states that the inverted Earth represents the radical shift in human direction the movement seeks, and notes that upside down emblems are often used as symbols of distress [REF].

VHEMT functions as a loose network rather than a formal organization, and does not compile a list of members. Daniel Metz of Willamette University stated in 1995 that VHEMT's mailing list had just under 400 subscribers [REF]. Six years later, Fox News said the list had only 230 subscribers [REF]. Knight says that anyone who agrees with his ideology is a member of the movement;[REF] and that this includes "millions of people" [REF].On its website, VHEMT characterizes the participants in its movement as "volunteer", "supporter", or "undecided", each of whom share an interest in a reduction in the rate of human births [REF]. 

Knight serves as the spokesman for VHEMT [REF]. He attends environmental conferences and events, where he publicizes information about population growth. VHEMT's message has, however, primarily been spread through coverage by media outlets, rather than events and its newsletter. VHEMT sells buttons and T-shirts, as well as bumper stickers that read "Thank you for not breeding" [REF].

Knight argues that the human population is far greater than the Earth can handle, and that the best thing for Earth's biosphere is for humans to voluntarily cease reproducing [REF]. He says that humans are "incompatible with the biosphere"[REF] and that human existence is causing environmental damage which will eventually bring about the extinction of humans (as well as other organisms) [REF]. According to Knight, the vast majority of human societies have not lived sustainable lifestyles,[REF] and attempts to live environmentally friendly lifestyles do not change the fact that human existence has ultimately been destructive to the Earth and many of its non-human organisms [REF]. Voluntary human extinction is promoted on the grounds that it will prevent human suffering and the extinction of other species; Knight points out that many species are threatened by the increasing human population [REF]. 

James Ormrod, a psychologist who profiled the group in the journal Psychoanalysis, Culture & Society, notes that the "most fundamental belief" of VHEMT is that "human beings should stop reproducing", and that some people consider themselves members of the group but do not actually support human extinction. Knight, however, believes that even if humans become more environmentally friendly, they could still return to environmentally destructive lifestyles and hence should eliminate themselves [REF]. Residents of First World countries bear the most responsibility to change, according to Knight, as they consume a large proportion of resources [REF]. 

Knight believes that Earth's non-human organisms have a higher overall value than humans and their accomplishments, such as art: "The plays of Shakespeare and the work of Einstein can't hold a candle to a tiger" [REF]. He argues that species higher in the food chain are less important than lower species [REF]. His ideology is drawn in part from deep ecology, and he sometimes refers to the Earth as Gaia. He notes that human extinction is unavoidable, and that it is better to become extinct soon to avoid concomitant extinctions [REF]. The potential for evolution of other organisms is also cited as a benefit. 

Knight sees abstinence from reproduction as an altruistic choice[REF]&nbsp;– a way to prevent involuntary human suffering[REF]&nbsp;– and cites the deaths of children from preventable causes as an example of needless suffering [REF]. Knight claims that non-reproduction would eventually allow humans to lead idyllic lifestyles in an environment comparable to the Garden of Eden,[REF] and maintains that the last remaining humans would be proud of their accomplishment. Other benefits of ceasing human reproduction that he cites include the end of abortion, war, and starvation [REF]. Knight argues that "procreation today is de facto child abuse". He maintains that the standard of human life will worsen if resources are consumed by a growing population rather than spent solving existing issues. He speculates that if people ceased to reproduce, they would use their energy for other pursuits, such as gardening,[REF] and suggests adoption and foster care as outlets for people who desire children [REF]. 

VHEMT rejects government-mandated human population control programs in favor of voluntary population reduction,[REF] supporting only the use of birth control and willpower to prevent pregnancies [REF]. Knight states that coercive tactics are unlikely to permanently lower the human population, citing the fact that humanity has survived catastrophic wars, famines, and viruses. Though their newsletter's name recalls the suicide manual Final Exit,[REF] the idea of mass suicide is rejected,[REF] and they have adopted the slogan "May we live long and die out" [REF]. A 1995 survey of VHEMT members found that a majority of VHEMT members felt a strong moral obligation to protect the earth, distrusted the ability of political processes to prevent harm to the environment, and were willing to surrender some of their rights for their cause. VHEMT members who strongly believed that "Civilization [is] headed for collapse" were most likely to embrace these views. However, VHEMT does not take any overt political stances. 

VHEMT promotes a more extreme ideology than Population Action International, a group that argues humanity should reduce—but not eliminate—its population to care for the Earth. However, the VHEMT platform is more moderate and serious than the Church of Euthanasia, which advocates population reduction by suicide and cannibalism [REF]. The 1995 survey found that 36% considered themselves members of Earth First! or had donated to the group in the previous five years.

Knight states his group's ideology runs counter to contemporary society's natalism. He believes this pressure has stopped many people from supporting, or even discussing, population control [REF]. He admits that his group is unlikely to succeed, but contends that attempting to reduce the Earth's population is the only moral option [REF]. 

Reception of Knight's idea in the mainstream media has been mixed. Writing in the San Francisco Chronicle, Gregory Dicum states that there is an "undeniable logic" to VHEMT's arguments, but he doubts whether Knight's ideas can succeed, arguing that many people desire to have children and cannot be dissuaded [REF]. Stephen Jarvis echoes this skepticism in The Independent, noting that VHEMT faces great difficulty owing to the human reproductive drive [REF]. At the The Guardians website, Guy Dammann applauds the movement's aim as "in many ways laudable", but argues that it is absurd to believe that humans will voluntarily seek extinction [REF]. Freelance writer Abby O'Reilly writes that since having children is frequently viewed as a measure of success, VHEMT's goal is difficult to attain [REF]. Knight contends in response to these arguments that though sexual desire is natural, human desire for children is a product of enculturation [REF]. 

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York has criticized Knight's platform, arguing that the existence of humanity is divinely ordained [REF]. Ormrod claims that Knight "arguably abandons deep ecology in favour of straightforward misanthropy". He notes that Knight's claim that the last humans in an extinction scenario would have an abundance of resources promotes his cause based on "benefits accruing to humans". Ormrod sees this type of argument as counter-intuitive, arguing that it borrows the language of "late-modern consumer societies". He faults Knight for what he sees as a failure to develop a consistent and unambiguous ideology. The Economist characterizes Knight's claim that voluntary human extinction is advisable due to limited resources as "Malthusian bosh". The paper further states that compassion for the planet does not necessarily require the pursuit of human extinction [REF]. Sociologist Frank Furedi also deems VHEMT to be a Malthusian group, classifying them as a type of environmental organization that "[thinks] the worst about the human species" [REF]. Writing in Spiked, Josie Appleton argues that the group is indifferent to humanity, rather than "anti-human" [REF]. 

Brian Bethune writes in Maclean's that Knight's logic is "as absurd as it's unassailable". However, he doubts Knight's claim that the last survivors of the human race would have pleasant lives and suspects that a "collective loss of the will to live" would prevail [REF]. In response to Knight's platform, journalist Sheldon Richman argues that humans are "active agents" and can change their behavior. He contends that people are capable of solving the problems facing Earth [REF]. Alan Weisman, author of The World Without Us, suggests a limit of one child per family as a preferable alternative to abstinence from reproduction [REF]. 

Katharine Mieszkowski of Salon.com recommends that childless people adopt VHEMT's arguments when facing "probing questions" about their childlessness [REF]. Writing in the Journal for Critical Animal Studies, Carmen Dell'Aversano notes that VHEMT seeks to renounce children as a symbol of perpetual human progress. She casts the movement as a form of "queer oppositional politics" because it rejects perpetual reproduction as a form of motivation. She argues that the movement seeks to come to a new definition of "civil order", as Lee Edelman suggested that queer theory should. Dell'Aversano believes that VHEMT fulfills Edelman's mandate because they embody the death drive rather than ideas that focus on the reproduction of the past [REF]. 

Although Knight's organization has been featured in a book titled Kooks: A Guide to the Outer Limits of Human Belief,[REF] The Guardian journalist Oliver Burkeman notes that in a phone conversation Knight seems "rather sane and self-deprecating" [REF]. Weisman echoes this sentiment, characterizing Knight as "thoughtful, soft-spoken, articulate, and quite serious" [REF]. Philosophers Steven Best and Douglas Kellner view VHEMT's stance as extreme, but they note that the movement formed in response to extreme stances found in "modern humanism".The Iron Fist Campaign was a sterilization program conducted in the summer of 2010 by family planning officials in Puning, a county in Guangdong, China [REF].

In 1978, the Chinese government introduced the one-child policy, which legally prevents couples from having more than one child, though there are some exemptions. The policy was created to address the country's overpopulation issue and economic problems. 

By 2010, family planning efforts in Puning had diminished due to rapid economic growth in the area, as Guangdong had become the most successful manufacturing region in the People's Republic of China [REF]. However, local family planning officials were pressured to reduce births to meet the nationwide quotas. Chen Hong-Ping, the regional Communist Party chief, launched the Iron Fist Campaign in order to meet these demands [REF].

In April 2010, a task force of approximately 600 local officials[REF] targeted 9,559 women who had violated the country's one-child policy [REF]. The women were required to report to government clinics to undergo sterilization [REF]. Family members of those women who had refused sterilization were detained indefinitely until the women complied with the procedure [REF]. In some cases, the women themselves were detained [REF]. Over the course of the 20-day campaign, 1,377 people were detained [REF]. From April to June, over 9,000 women were reported to have been sterilized as a result of the campaign [REF].

News of the campaign did not make major headlines outside of local newspapers. He Yafu, an independent expert on family planning in China, suggested that the central government made an effort to conceal the results of the campaign because Chinese law specifically prohibited the means used to enforce it [REF]. Provincial officials have reported that the local Puning authorities will be investigated to determine the legality of their actions [REF]. Kate Allen of Amnesty International described the campaign as "appalling" and voiced her opinion that "authorities must condemn this practice immediately" [REF].. 

Mao Hengfeng (simplified Chinese: 毛恒凤; Traditional Chinese: 毛恆風; pinyin: Máo Héngfēng; born 9 December 1961) is a women's rights and human rights activist in the People's Republic of China. She refused to abort her third child after already having twins and was detained in an ankang (psychiatric hospital) and then dismissed from her job. A frequent petitioner, Mao served a year and a half of re-education through labor in 2004-2005 and two and half years in prison for "intentional destruction of property" in 2006-2008. She was released from Shanghai Women's Prison on 29 November 2008. Since then she has served another year in RTL after protesting in support of Liu Xiaobo. She was briefly released, in February 2011, but under house arrest. She was almost immediately taken again, and placed in Shanghai City Prison Hospital, where she was previously tortured and ill-treated [REF].

A mother of twins, Mao Hengfeng was reportedly dismissed from her job at a Shanghai soap factory in 1988 because she became pregnant for a second time with a third child, in contravention of China's family planning regulations. Mao refused to have an abortion, and was subsequently detained in a psychiatric hospital. She gave birth on 28 February 1989, and was notified on 20 March that she had been dismissed from her job for missing sixteen days of work. This was the period when she was giving birth and recuperating, as well as recovering from her ordeal in the psychiatric institute.

Mao Hengfeng appealed against her dismissal under China's Labour Law, and was reinstated to her job. However, the soap factory disputed the ruling. Mao was seven months pregnant with her fourth child at the time of the appeal hearing, when the judge reportedly told her that if she terminated this third pregnancy he would rule in her favour. Concerned for the welfare of her existing family, Mao terminated her pregnancy against her wishes, but still the court ruled against her, apparently because she had taken sixteen days of "unauthorized leave" from work, and also for her original violation of family planning policies. 

From 1990 to 2004 Mao repeatedly petitioned the authorities for redress for her dismissal from work, her forced abortion, and the denial of other basic rights including that of freedom of expression. She also made several attempts to initiate legal proceedings against the authorities in relation to these abuses, but courts repeatedly failed to respond or refused to file the cases. 

As well as actively petitioning authorities to seek redress for herself, Mao Hengfeng has also acted to safeguard the rights of others. For example, she is known to have actively supported other people seeking redress over alleged forced evictions in Shanghai and Shanxi province, and is reportedly regarded by the Shanghai authorities as one of the city's most persistent and experienced petitioners. She is actively campaigning on behalf of other individuals arbitrarily detained in "Re-education Through Labour" or psychiatric facilities, including women held for alleged violation of family planning policies. 

She opposes arbitrary detention and campaigns for legal reforms that ensure redress and protect ordinary people against abuse of power. 

More recently she was arrested due to her protest in support of human rights activist Liu Xiaobo.

Mao Hengfeng was assigned without trial to eighteen months' "Re-education through labor" (RTL) in April 2004 after repeatedly protesting about various abuses of her rights. Her welfare allowances were discontinued, leaving her family in severe financial difficulties. Many people in Shanghai openly demonstrated in support of her. 

On 13 September 2005, Mao and her husband, Wu Xuewei (吴雪伟), were both reportedly beaten by police when they gathered with over a hundred other petitioners at Putuo District Court in Shanghai. They were supporting Xu Zhengqing, a petitioner who was facing trial in connection with his attempts to attend a memorial service in Beijing in January 2005. Along with dozens of other petitioners, the couple was detained by the police. Mao Hengfeng managed to escape and tried to continue her protest on behalf of Xu Zhengqing. However, she was detained again and sent back to her residential district, where local police and government officials apparently threatened her with imprisonment if she continued her protests and presented her with a formal police summons for investigation on suspicion of 'disturbing the normal lives of others'. 

From 23-27 September 2005, Mao and her family were reportedly held under a form of house arrest after she stated that she would go to a United Nations representative office in Beijing to protest about the abuses. Seven police officers reportedly stood guard in front of her flat preventing her from leaving, even to go shopping. 

On 29 September 2005 she was again placed under house arrest; an official told her that this would continue until the end of the fifth plenary session of the 16th Central Committee of the Communist Party on 11 October 2005. The following day, three police officers and seven Yangpu District Official Guards were stationed in front of her house. She was warned that she would be detained or face violent treatment if she tried to break out.

In early 2006, Mao Hengfeng was detained in a roundup of petitioners before the anniversary of the Tiananmen Incident and placed under residential surveillance. She was then charged with "violating the terms of residential surveillance," and placed her under "soft detention" in a small guesthouse room with six other men and women in Yangpu District, Shanghai [REF]. While under detention, Mao broke two table lamps in the guesthouse and was for that reason formally arrested on 30 June 2006 for "intentional destruction of property."[REF] She was sentenced to two-and-a-half years in prison on 12 January 2007 and imprisoned at Shanghai Women's Prison [REF]. 

Mao and her husband, Wu Xuewei, filed an appeal against Mao's sentence. At the appeal hearing on 16 April 2007, the judge at Shanghai Municipal No. 2 Intermediate People's Court merely read a statement reaffirming Mao's sentence, allowing no evidence to be presented by Xu or Mao's lawyer. Mao was tormented and tortured by prisoners and staff alike while in prison [REF]. In addition to her regular abuse, she was placed under solitary confinement for 70 days, a violation of China's Prison Law, which allows a maximum of 15 days in solitary confinement [REF]. She was finally released on 29 November 2008, at the scheduled end of her sentence [REF].

On 25 December 2009, she was found guilty of "disturbing public order" due to her peaceful protest outside the Beijing municipal intermediate court, where she was campaigning in support of the human rights activist Liu Xiaobo. She was sent back to the RTL camp on 4th March, 2010. There she was tortured and ill-treated. Abuses include force-feeding, blocking her access to food from her family and ordering other inmates to repeatedly beat her. Due to her protests about human rights in the RTL camp, on 9th September 2010, she was tied up for four days in the same position, without food or water. This was repeated on the 29th September. 

She was released on 22nd February, 2011. A CT scan showed that the ill-treatment had caused her to have bleeding in her brain. She was very quickly taken again, and is now believed to be in Shanghai City Prison Hospital, where she was previously tortured and ill-treated [REF]. 

Recently, on July 28, 2011, Mao Hengfeng has been released again to her family in an unconscious state. Members of the police force are still currently keeping Mao Hengfeng under surveillance [REF].

Amnesty International have issued an Urgent Action, calling for her immediate release, an investigation into the abuse, and provision of independent medical assistance and assessment [REF].Heihaizi () or "black children" is a term applied in China, denoting children born outside the One child policy, or generally children who are not registered in the national household registration system. In Japanese the term becomes or へいはいず (literally: "black seed child"). 

If a family not permitted to have a second child under the One Child Policy has a second child, the family sometimes chooses not to enter them in the family register, often to avoid financial and social penalties. Being excluded from the family register (in effect, a birth certificate), they do not legally exist and as a result cannot access most public services, such as education and heath care [REF]. They also cannot get a legitimate job or participate in any activity that requires formal identification. Aside from illegal occupation that does not require registration, such as organised crime and prostitution, Heihaizi have the option to remain with their family and assist with private work, such as agriculture or private businesses. 

In some parts of China children are conceived and born with the purpose of being sold to people traffickers, usually soon after birth[REF]. Traffickers then sell them to wealthy families within China or take them abroad, again, to sell them. These children may be used for factory labour, whilst a large market in child brides and underage brothels also exists for girls in particular [REF]. 

During the 2000 Chinese census report the number of persons not registered was estimated at 8,052,484 persons, which amounted to 0.65% of the total population at the time[REF]. 

Due to the current One Child Policy and a cultural preference for male over female children, some Chinese women are known to give birth to female children in secret, hoping that a later child will be male. The male child is then registered as the parents' only child [REF].. 

Demographic momentum is the phenomenon of continued population increase despite reduced reproductive rates. (see also Population momentum.) . 

Even in the face of extreme measures aimed at lowering reproductive rates, the population will continue to grow due to a large proportion of its population entering its reproductive years. 

For example, when China first introduced its one-child policy, population growth continued regardless. Even though the number of children born reduced dramatically, the sheer number of maturing youth was significant. In 1979 when the one-child policy entered into force, the number of people becoming adults was based on the number of births around 1950s, not 1979. As a result, the Chinese population maintained the same momentum of increase as for the past 20 years. It is only now that the Chinese population has reached a somewhat stabilized population growth.Two-child policy is a government-imposed limit of two children allowed per family. It is used for some population groups in China, has previously been used in Vietnam, and has lately been discussed in the Philippines. Although not by law, citizens of Hong Kong are also highly encouraged to have two children as a limit, and it is used as part of the region's family planning strategies.

During the 1970s, Chinese citizens were encouraged to have two children. The ongoing Cultural Revolution and the strain it placed on the nation were large factors. During this time, the birth rate dropped from nearly 6 children per woman to just under 3 [REF]. (The colloquial term "births per woman" is usually formalized as the Total Fertility Rate (TFR), a technical term in demographic analysis meaning the average number of children that would be born to a woman over her lifetime if she were to experience the exact current age-specific fertility rates through her lifetime.) . 

As China's youngest generation (born under the one-child policy, which first became a requirement for most couples in 1979) is now of age for formation of the next generation, a single child would be left with having to provide support for his or her two parents and four grandparents. In response to this issue, certain provinces maintained that couples were allowed to have two children if both parents were only children themselves. As of 2009, all provinces in the nation adopted this new adaptation [REF]. 

Moreover, in accordance with PRC's affirmative action policies towards ethnic minorities, all non-Han ethnic groups are subjected to different rules and are usually allowed to have two children in urban areas, and three or four in rural areas. Han Chinese living in rural areas are often permitted to have two children, as exceptions exist if the first child is a daughter [REF]. Because of cases such as these, as well as urban couples who simply pay a fine (or "social maintenance fee") to have more children,[REF] the overall fertility rate of mainland China is, in fact, closer to two children per family than to one child per family (1.8).

In Hong Kong, the Eugenics League was found in 1936, which became The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong in 1950 [REF]. The organisation provides family planning advice, sex education, birth control services to the general public of Hong Kong. In the 1970s, due to the rapidly rising population, it launched the "Two is Enough" campaign,[REF] which reduced the general birth rate through educational means. The organisation,[REF] founded the International Planned Parenthood Federation with its counterparts in seven other countries [REF].
The Total Fertility rate in Hong Kong is 1.04 births per Woman.

Vietnam had a two-child policy in the 1960s, which was used again in the 1990s [REF]. The movement has been proven to lower Vietnam's birth rate, which had previously been at nearly 4 children per woman. In 2003, the plan was discontinued. In 2008, it was announced that the government was considering reviving it [REF].. 

Population ageing occurs when the median age of a country or region rises. This happens because of rising life expectancy or declining birth rates. Excepting 18 countries termed 'demographic outliers' by the UN[REF][REF]) this process is taking place in every country and region across the globe. In the entirety of recorded human history, the world has never seen as aged a population as currently exists globally [REF]. The UN predicts the rate of population ageing in the 21st century will exceed that in the 20th [REF]. Countries vary significantly in terms of the degree, and the pace, of these changes, and the UN expects populations that began ageing later to have less time to adapt to the many implications of these changes [REF].

Population ageing is a shift in the distribution of a country's population towards older ages. This is usually reflected in an increase in the population's mean and median ages, a decline in the proportion of the population composed of children, and a rise in the proportion of the population that is elderly. Population ageing is widespread across the world. It is most advanced in the most highly developed countries. However the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing [REF], one of the top institutions looking at global population ageing, has concluded that population ageing has slowed considerably in Europe and will have the greatest future impact in Asia, especially as Asia is in stage five of the demographic transition model. 

Among the countries currently classified by the United Nations as more developed (with a total population of 1.2 billion in 2005), the overall median age rose from 29.0 in 1950 to 37.3 in 2000, and is forecast to rise to 45.5 by 2050. The corresponding figures for the world as a whole are 23.9 in 1950, 26.8 in 2000, and 37.8 in 2050. In Japan, one of the fastest ageing countries in the world, in 1950 there were 9.3 people under 20 for every person over 65. By 2025 this ratio is forecast to be 0.59 people under 20 for every person older than 65 [REF]. 

Population ageing arises from two (possibly related) demographic effects: increasing longevity and declining fertility. An increase in longevity raises the average age of the population by increasing the numbers of surviving older people. A decline in fertility reduces the number of babies, and as the effect continues, the numbers of younger people in general also reduce. A possible third factor is migration. 

Of these two forces, it is declining fertility that is the largest contributor to population ageing in the world today [REF]. More specifically, it is the large decline in the overall fertility rate over the last half century that is primarily responsible for the population ageing in the world’s most developed countries. Because many developing countries are going through faster fertility transitions, they will experience even faster population ageing than the currently developed countries in the future. 

The speed of population ageing is likely to increase over the next 3 decades,[REF] yet few countries have the evidence to determine if their growing older populations are living the extra years of life in good or poor health. A "compression of morbidity" would imply reducing reduced disability in old age,[REF] whereas an expansion would see an increase in poor health with increased longevity. Another option has been posed for a situation of "dynamic equilibrium" [REF]. This is crucial information for governments if the limits of lifespan continue to increase indefinitely, as some researchers believe it will [REF]. The World Health Organization's suite of household health studies is working to provide the needed health and well-being evidence, including, for example the World Health Survey,[REF] and the Study on Global Ageing and Adult Health (SAGE)). These surveys cover 308,000 respondents aged 18+ years and 81,000 aged 50+ years from 70 countries. 

The Global Ageing Survey, exploring attitudes, expectations and behaviours towards later life and retirement, directed by George Leeson, and covering 44,000 people aged 40–80 in 24 countries from across the globe has revealed that many people are now fully aware of the ageing of the world's population and the implications which this will have for their lives and the lives of their children and grandchildren. 

Canada has the highest per capita immigration rate in the world, partly to counter population ageing. The C. D. Howe Institute, a conservative think tank, has suggested that immigration cannot be used as a viable mean for countering population ageing [REF]. This conclusion is also seen in the work of other scholars. Demographers Peter McDonald and Rebecca Kippen comment, "[a]s fertility sinks further below replacement level, increasingly higher levels of annual net migration will be required to maintain a target of even zero population growth."[REF] .

Asia and Europe are the two regions where a significant number of countries face severe population ageing in the near future. In these regions within twenty years many countries will face a situation where the largest population cohort will be those over 65 and average age will be approaching 50. The Oxford Institute of Ageing [REF] is an institution looking at global population ageing. Its research reveals that many of the views of global ageing are based on myths and that there will be considerable opportunities for the world as its population matures. The Institute's Director, Professor Sarah Harper [REF] highlights in her book Ageing Societies [REF] the implications for work, families, health, education and technology of the ageing of the world's population. 

Most of the developed world (with the notable exception of the United States) now has sub-replacement fertility levels, and population growth now depends largely on immigration together with population momentum which arises from previous large generations now enjoying longer life expectancy.

The economic effects of an ageing population are considerable. Older people have higher accumulated savings per head than younger people, but may be spending less on consumer goods. Depending on the age ranges at which the changes occur, an ageing population may thus result in lower interest rates and the economic benefits of lower inflation. Some economists (Japan) see advantages in such changes, notably the opportunity to progress automation and technological development without causing unemployment. They emphasize a shift from GDP to personal well-being. 

However population ageing also increases some categories of expenditure, including some met from public finances. The largest area of expenditure in many countries is now health care, whose cost is likely to increase dramatically as the population ages. This would present governments with hard choices between higher taxes, including a possible reweighing of tax from earnings to consumption, and a reduced government role in providing health care. 

The second largest expenditure of most governments is education and these expenses will tend to fall with an ageing population, especially as fewer young people would probably continue into tertiary education as they would be in demand as part of the work force. 

Social security systems have also begun to experience problems. Earlier defined benefit pension systems are experiencing sustainability problems due to the increased longevity. The extension of the pension period was not paired with an extension of the active labour period or a rise in pension contributions, resulting in a decline of replacement ratios. In recent years, many countries have adopted policies to strengthen the financial sustainability of pension systems, although the challenges regarding pension adequacy remain."Little Emperors" is a name that refers to only children in the People's Republic of China after the one-child policy was implemented. Attributed most frequently to increased spending power within the family unit and the parents' desire for their child to experience the benefits they were denied, the syndrome results from the children's sole command of the attention of their parents and grandparents. Described as a problem "so acute that it's changing how society functions, the Little Emperor effect has grown beyond a side effect that "the architects of China's one-child policy could never have foreseen"[REF] into a "behavioral time-bomb."[REF] . 

The Little Emperor effect is primarily an urban phenomenon. The one-child policy is not as rigorously enforced in the countryside as in the urban communities, and given the value of labor, only children are not prevalent within rural communities. Economic development has not had as large an impact outside of urban centers.

China's economic growth has tremendously elevated the annual per capita income of urban areas as women have become increasingly represented in the workforce, frequently resulting in families with two sources of income [REF]. This greatly improved purchasing power coupled with excessive pampering of only children is the cause of increased spending on children. From toys to clothes, parents shower their child in material goods and give in to every demand; it is not uncommon for children to be the "best-dressed members of their families."[REF] Recently, it has become common for nearly half a family's income to be spent on the child [REF]. This effect has become considerable enough to be noticed on a global scale: marketing groups attribute a near doubling of platinum jewelry sales in China to "China's 'spoiled brat' generation."[REF] . 

Little Emperors also bear the burden of heavy expectations. Parents who feel they lost their chance in the Cultural Revolution ("compensation syndrome"[REF]) put immense pressure on these children to succeed and compete academically [REF]. From an early age parents push their only child to educational extremes as they cater to their whims; "though many of these precocious kids can recite the English alphabet or read newspapers in traditional Chinese characters by the time they're 10, their parents often still perform basic tasks for them: fixing their hair, tying their shoes, wiping their bottoms."[REF] Boarding school, private English lessons, music lessons and an additional range of extracurricular activities are the normal fare though after tough competition only two percent of the Little Emperors will be able to study at a university [REF]. 

One factor frequently associated with the Little Emperor effect, the four-two-one family structure refers to the collapse of the traditionally large Chinese family into four grandparents and two parents doting on one child [REF]. Beyond the obvious further funneling of resources towards the whims and potential of the only child, this four-two-one reconfiguration of the familial structure has distinct ramifications for Chinese society. The Little Emperors of the one-child policy have warped the traditional family beyond recognition; "in the past, the power in a household devolved from the father," who ruled over a multitude of offspring [REF]. Now the household structures itself entirely around the one child. This shift from earlier structures that supported the culture of filial piety has caused much concern; "traditionally, a great number of children, particularly sons, was seen as proof of the family's standing and it guaranteed the continuity of ancestor-worshipping customs."[REF] The most salient issue stems from the worry about who will look after the elderly. Aside from a potentially radical shift in cultural norms concerning the treatment of the elderly, this new family structure poses a purely demographic problem: "the composition of the dependent population is shifting away from children toward elderly population."[REF] .

The combination of the immense pressure to excel within their education and the extreme pampering is reported to have resulted in a stunting of social and emotional growth [REF]. The perceived maladjustment of the Little Emperors is an exaggerated subject within the media; "the government has [tried] to cope with the Little Emperor problem through frequent cautionary stories in the press."[REF] These stories depict children hanging themselves after being denied sweets, and cases of matricide in retribution for a scolding or late dinner [REF]. The discussion of Little Emperors has saturated public discussion concerning the generation of the one-child policy within Chinese and international media. 

However, psychological studies do not support this view, or at best, offered mixed results. Results from earlier studies are inconsistent with more recent studies that suggest there are no reliable differences between only children and those with siblings [REF].Human rights in the People's Republic of China are a matter of dispute between the Chinese government, other countries, international NGOs, and dissidents inside the country. Organizations such as the U.S. State Department, Amnesty International, and Human Rights Watch have accused the Chinese government of restricting the freedoms of speech, movement, and religion of Chinese citizens. The Chinese government argues for a "wider" definition of human rights, to include economic and social as well as political rights, all in relation to "national culture" and the level of development of the country [REF]. In this regard, China claims that human rights are being improved [REF].
China also repeated many times that its constitution specifies not only citizenship rights but also the "Four Cardinal Principles"; in legal respects the "Four Cardinal Principles" are higher than citizenship rights, meaning there was a legal basis according to the Chinese constitution when China arrested people who wanted, according to China, to overthrow these principles. Chinese people who obey these principles can, according to the Chinese government, enjoy all Chinese citizenship rights. 

However, numerous human rights organizations note multiple problems with the Chinese government. Controversial human rights issues in China include policies such as capital punishment, the one-child policy, the political status of Tibet, and lack of protections regarding freedom of press and religion. One of the foremost areas of concern is a lack of legal rights, for want of an independent judiciary, rule of law, and due process. Another prominent area of concern is lack of labor rights, which is related to the hukou system, the absence of independent unions, and discrimination against rural workers and ethnic minorities. Yet another area of concern is the lack of religious freedom, highlighted by alleged repression of Christian,[REF][REF][REF][REF][REF][REF] Tibetan Buddhist, and Falun Gong groups. Some indigenous groups are trying to expand these freedoms; they include Human Rights in China, Chinese Human Rights Defenders (CHRD), and the China Human Rights Lawyers Concern Group (CHRLCG).

The Chinese government recognizes that there are problems with the current legal system,[REF] such as:

A lack of laws in general, not just ones to protect civil rights. 
A lack of due process. 
Conflicts of law [REF]. 

As judges are appointed by the State and the judiciary as a whole does not have its own budget,[REF] this has led to corruption and the abuse of administrative power.

Although the 1982 constitution guarantees freedom of speech,[REF] the Chinese government often uses the subversion of state power and the protection of state secret clause to imprison those who are critical of the government [REF]. The government is also heavily involved in censoring news through the Propaganda Department of the Communist Party of China, even though no state law explicitly gives it such authority. 

The Chinese government promised to issue permits allowing people to protest in 'protest parks' during the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing,[REF] but a majority of the applications were withdrawn, suspended, or vetoed,[REF] and the police detained some of the people who applied [REF]. References to certain controversial events and political movements are blocked on the Internet and in many publications [REF]. Chinese law forbids the advocacy of independence for any part of its territory, as well as public challenge to CPC domination of the government of China. An unauthorized protest during the Olympics by seven foreign activists at the Chinese Ethnic Culture Park, demanding Tibetan independence and blocking the park's entrance, was cleared[REF] and the protesters deported [REF]. 

Foreign internet search engines including Microsoft Bing!, Yahoo!, Google Search China[REF] have come under criticism for aiding in these practices, including banning the word "democracy" from its chat rooms in China. Yahoo! in particular, stated that it will not protect the privacy and confidentiality of its Chinese customers from the authorities [REF]. In 2005 reporter Shi Tao was sentenced to imprisonment for 10 years for releasing an internal Communist Party document to an overseas Chinese democracy site after Yahoo! China provided his personal emails and IP addresses to the Chinese government [REF]. Skype president Josh Silverman said it was "common knowledge" that TOM had "established procedures to.. block instant messages containing certain words deemed offensive by the Chinese authorities."[REF] .

Critics also argue that the Chinese authorities failed to live up to their promises on press freedom. Freedom House ranked China "Not Free"[REF] in its annual press freedom survey. PRC journalist He Qinglian says that PRC media controls rely on confidential guidance from the Communist Party propaganda department, intense monitoring, and punishment for violators rather than on pre-publication censorship [REF]. ITV News reporter John Ray was arrested while covering a "Free Tibet" protest [REF]. Foreign journalists also reported that their access to certain websites, including those of human rights organisations, was restricted [REF]. International Olympic Committee president Jacques Rogge stated at the end of the 2008 Olympic Games that "The regulations might not be perfect but they are a sea-change compared to the situation before. We hope that they will continue" [REF]. The Foreign Correspondents Club of China (FCCC) issued a statement that "despite welcome progress in terms of accessibility and the number of press conferences within the Olympic facilities, the FCCC has been alarmed at the use of violence, intimidation and harassment outside. The club has confirmed more than 30 cases of reporting interference since the formal opening of the Olympic media centre on 25 July, and is checking at least 20 other reported incidents" [REF].

The Communist Party came to power in the late 1940s and instigated a command economy. In 1958, Mao set up a residency permit system defining where people could work, and classified an individual as a "rural" or "urban" worker [REF]. A worker seeking to move from the country to an urban area to take up non-agricultural work would have to apply through the relevant bureaucracies. People who worked outside their authorized domain or geographical area would not qualify for grain rations, employer-provided housing, or health care [REF]. There were controls over education, employment, marriage and so on [REF]. One reason cited for instituting this system was to prevent the possible chaos caused by the predictable large-scale urbanization [REF]. As a part of the one country, two systems policy proposed by Deng Xiaoping and accepted by the British and Portuguese governments, the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macao retained separate border control and immigration policies with the rest of the PRC. Chinese citizens had to gain permission from the government before travelling to Hong Kong or Macau, but this requirement was abolished after the handover. Since then, restrictions imposed by the SAR governments have been the limiting factor on travel. 

The Washington Times reported in 2000 that although migrant labourers play an important part in spreading wealth in Chinese villages, they are treated "like second-class citizens by a system so discriminatory that it has been likened to apartheid."[REF] Anita Chan also posits that China's household registration and temporary residence permit system has created a situation analogous to the passbook system in South Africa which was designed to regulate the supply of cheap labor [REF]. In 2000, the Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy has alleged that people of Han descent in Tibet have a far easier time acquiring the necessary permits to live in urban areas than ethnic Tibetans do [REF]. 

Abolition of this policy was proposed in 11 provinces, mainly along the developed eastern coast. The law has already been changed such that migrant workers no longer face summary arrest, after a widely publicised incident in 2003, when a university-educated migrant died in Guangdong province. The Beijing law lecturer who exposed the incident said it spelt the end of the hukou system: in most smaller cities, the system has been abandoned; it has "almost lost its function" in big cities like Beijing and Shanghai [REF].

In November 2005 Jiang Wenran, acting director of the China Institute at the University of Alberta, said this system was one of the most strictly enforced 'apartheid' structures in modern world history [REF]. He stated "Urban dwellers enjoy a range of social, economic and cultural benefits while peasants, the majority of the Chinese population, are treated as second-class citizens" [REF]. 

The discrimination enforced by the hukou system became particularly onerous in the 1980s after hundreds of millions of migrant laborers were forced out of state corporations and co-operatives [REF]. The system classifies workers as "urban" or "rural",[REF][REF] and attempts by workers classified as "rural" to move to urban centers were tightly controlled by the Chinese bureaucracy, which enforced its control by denying access to essential goods and services such as grain rations, housing, and health care,[REF] and by regularly closing down migrant workers' private schools [REF]. The hukou system also enforced pass laws similar to those in South Africa,[REF][REF] with "rural" workers requiring six passes to work in provinces other than their own,[REF] and periodic police raids which rounded up those without permits, placed them in detention centers, and deported them [REF]. As in South Africa, the restrictions placed on the mobility of migrant workers were pervasive,[REF] and transient workers were forced to live a precarious existence in company dormitories or shanty towns, and suffering abusive consequences [REF]. Anita Chan furthers that China's household registration and temporary residence permit system has created a situation analogous to the passbook system in apartheid South Africa, which were designed to regulate the supply of cheap labor [REF]. 

The Chinese Ministry of Public Security justified these practices on the grounds that they assisted the police in tracking down criminals and maintaining public order, and provided demographic data for government planning and programs [REF].

During the Cultural Revolution (1966–1976), particularly the Destruction of Four Olds campaign, religious affairs of all types were persecuted and discouraged by the Communists with many religious buildings looted and destroyed. Since then, there have been efforts to repair, reconstruct and protect historical and cultural religious sites [REF]. The US department of state criticizes in its human rights report 2005 that not enough has been done to repair or restore damaged and destroyed sites [REF]. 

The 1982 Constitution guarantees its citizens the right to believe in any religion."Citizens of the People's Republic of China enjoy freedom of religious belief. No state organ, public organization or individual may compel citizens to believe in, or not to believe in, any religion; nor may they discriminate against citizens who believe in, or do not believe in, any religion. The state protects normal religious activities. No one may make use of religion to engage in activities that disrupt public order, impair the health of citizens or interfere with the educational system of the state. Religious bodies and religious affairs are not subject to any foreign domination."[REF] . 

Members of the Communist Party are officially required to be atheists,[REF] but many party members privately violate this rule,[REF] .

The government tries to maintain tight control over all religions, so the only legal Christian groups (Three-Self Patriotic Movement and Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association) are those under the Communist Party control. The members of the illegal, underground Catholic church true to the Pope are persecuted [REF]. 

The "official Catholic" metropolitan bishop was elected in China in 2007 to replace the deceased Fu Tieshan instead of appointed by the Pope as is customary [REF].
According to Pope Benedict XVI, the Catholic Church in particular is viewed as a foreign power in a situation somewhat analogous to that in Post-Reformation England, and so the official church in China is state-controlled; [REF][REF] .

The government now claims the power to ensure that no new 'living Buddha' can be identified: the State Administration for Religious Affairs issued a 14-part regulation to limit the influence of the Dalai Lama. It declared that after 1 September 2007, "[no] living Buddha [may be reincarnated] without government approval, since Qing dynasty, when the live Buddha system was established." [REF]. The Chinese-appointed Panchen Lama is branded a fake by loyalists [REF]. Examples of the political controls exercised in 1998 are:[REF]

quotas on the number of monks to reduce the spiritual population
forced denunciation of the Dalai Lama as a spiritual leader
unapproved monks' expulsion from monasteries
forced recitation of patriotic scripts supporting China
Restriction of religious study before age 18. 

Monks celebrating the reception of the US Congressional Gold Medal by the Dalai Lama have been detained [REF].

On 20 July 1999, the government banned Falun Gong and all 'heterodox religions', and began a nationwide crackdown of the popular new religious movement[REF] following a demonstration by 10,000 practitioners outside the leadership enclave at Zhongnanhai on 25 April [REF]. Protests in Beijing were frequent for the first few years following the 1999 edict, though these protests have largely been eradicated [REF]. Practitioners have occasionally hacked into state television channels to broadcast pro-Falun Gong materials. Outside of mainland China, practitioners are active in appealing to the governments, media, and people of their respective countries about the situation in China. 

According to Pulitzer prize-winning journalist Ian Denis Johnson, the government mobilized every aspect of society, including the media apparatus, police force, army, education system, families and workplaces, against Falun Gong [REF]. An extra-constitutional body, the "6–10 Office" was created to do what Forbes describes as "[overseeing] the terror campaign."[REF] The campaign was driven by large-scale propaganda through television, newspaper, radio and internet [REF]. Human Rights Watch noted that families and workplaces were urged to cooperate with the government, while practitioners themselves were subject to various coercive measures to have them recant their beliefs [REF]. Amnesty International raised particular concerns over reports of torture, illegal imprisonment including forced labor, and psychiatric abuses [REF]. 

In March 2006, Falun Gong and The Epoch Times said that the Chinese government and its agencies, including the People's Liberation Army, were conducting "widespread and systematic organ harvesting of living practitioners" specifically at the Sujiatun Thrombosis Hospital in Shenyang according to two eye-witness accounts that practitioners detained in the hospital's basement were being tissue-typed, and killed to order [REF]. In July 2006, David Kilgour and David Matas, sponsored by Falun Gong to investigate the allegations, published a report which they admitted the evidence was circumstantial, but which taken together supported the allegations that large numbers of Falun Gong practitioners were victims of systematic organ harvesting whilst still alive [REF]. 

The Chinese government categorically denied any mistreatment of Falun Gong practitioners, and a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman denounced the organ harvesting allegations as "absurd lies concocted by the Falun Gong cult followers" [REF]. Dissident Harry Wu said the two Epoch Times witnesses were "not reliable and most probably they had fabricated the story"; he rejected the totality of the allegations after sending in investigators [REF]. A Congressional Research Service said that there was "insufficient evidence to support this specific allegation," without elaboration [REF]. David Ownby, a noted expert on Falun Gong, said "Organ harvesting is happening in China, but I see no evidence proving it is aimed particularly at Falun Gong practitioners."[REF] Glen McGregor of the Ottawa Citizen said "Depending on who you believe, the Kilgour-Matas report is either compelling evidence that proves the claims about Falun Gong.. or a collection of conjecture and inductive reasoning that fails to support its own conclusions" [REF].

The People's Republic of China is signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, but has not ratified it. All citizens of the People's Republic of China who have reached the age of 18 have the right to vote and stand for election, regardless of ethnicity, race, sex, occupation, family background, religious belief, education, property status, or length of residence, except persons deprived of political rights according to law. 

In Maoist era China, there was massive political repression. This is now replaced by selective political repression of small groups of people who openly challenge the CPC's rule; this repression in implemented through the judicial system [REF]. The most recent mass movement for political freedom was crushed in the Tiananmen Square Massacre in 1989, the estimated death toll of which ranges from about 200 to 10,000 depending on sources [REF]. In November 1992, 192 number of Chinese political activists and democracy advocates submitted a petition to the 16th National Congress of the Communist Party of China to introduce political reforms. One of the six demands was the ratification of the Covenant. As a reaction to the petition, the Chinese authorities arrested Zhao Changqing, proponent of the petition, and are still holding a number of activists for attempted subversion. 

One of the most famous dissidents is Zhang Zhixin, who is known for standing up against the ultra-left. [REF] In October 2008, the government denounced the European Parliament's decision to award the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to Hu Jia, on grounds that it was "gross interference in China's domestic affairs" to give such an award to a "jailed criminal. in disregard of our repeated representations."[REF] . 

On 8 December 2008, two days before the release of Charter 08, Liu Xiaobo was arrested. He along with three hundred and two other Chinese citizens, signed Charter 08, a manifesto released on the 60th anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 10 Dec.2009), written in the style of the Czechoslovakian Charter 77 calling for greater freedom of expression, human rights, and free elections.[6] As of May 2009, the Charter has collected over 9,000 signatures from Chinese of various walks of life. 

Although the Chinese government does not interfere with Chinese people's privacy as much as it used to,[REF] it still deems it necessary to keep tabs on what people say in public. Internet forums are strictly monitored, as is international postal mail (this is sometimes inexplicably "delayed" or simply "disappears") and e-mail [REF]. 

Local officials are chosen by election, and though non-Communist Party candidates are allowed to stand, those with dissident views can face arbitrary exclusion from the ballot, interference with campaigning, and even detention [REF]. 

Freedom House rates China as a 6 (second lowest) in political freedoms. The organization characterizes the changes in China in 2011 as such: "With a sensitive change of leadership approaching in 2012 and popular uprisings against authoritarian regimes occurring across the Middle East, the ruling Chinese Communist Party showed no signs of loosening its grip on power in 2011. Despite minor legal improvements regarding the death penalty and urban property confiscation, the government stalled or even reversed previous reforms related to the rule of law, while security forces resorted to extralegal forms of repression. Growing public frustration over corruption and injustice fueled tens of thousands of protests and several large outbursts of online criticism during the year. The party responded by committing more resources to internal security forces and intelligence agencies, engaging in the systematic enforced disappearance of dozens of human rights lawyers and bloggers, and enhancing controls over online social media."[REF] .

China's birth control policy, known widely as the one-child policy, was implemented in 1979 by the Chinese government to alleviate the overpopulation problem. Having more than one child is illegal and punishable by fines. Voice of America cites critics who argue that it contributes to forced abortions, human rights violations, female infanticide, abandonment and sex-selective abortions, believed to be relatively commonplace in some areas of the country [REF]. This is thought to have been a significant contribution to the gender imbalance in mainland China, where there is a 118:100 ratio of male to female children reported [REF]. Forced abortions and sterilizations have also been reported [REF]. 

It is also argued that the one-child policy is not effective enough to justify its costs, and that the dramatic decrease in Chinese fertility started before the program began in 1979 for unrelated factors. The policy seems to have had little impact on rural areas (home to about 80% of the population), where birth rates never dropped below 2.5 children per female [REF]. Nevertheless, the Chinese government and others estimate that at least 250&nbsp;million births have been prevented by the policy [REF]. 

In 2002, the laws related to the One-child policy were amended to allow ethnic minorities and Chinese living in rural areas to have more than one child. The policy was generally not enforced in those areas of the country even before this. The policy has been relaxed in urban areas to allow people who have single children to have two children [REF].

China executes more people each year than the rest of the world combined [REF]. According to the United Nations Secretary-General, between 1994 and 1999 China was ranked seventh in executions per capita, behind Singapore, Saudi Arabia, Belarus, Sierra Leone, Kyrgyzstan, and Jordan [REF]. Amnesty International claims that real figures are much higher than official ones, stating that in China the statistics are considered State secrets. 

Figures from 2006 and 2007 are reported to have been 1,010 and 470 executions, respectively [REF]. In January 2007, China's state media announced that all death penalty cases will be reviewed by the Supreme People's Court. Since 1983, China's highest court did not review all cases. This marks a return to China's pre-1983 policy [REF]. In light of these changes, figures from 2007 display a substantial reduction in executions with only 470 reported executions compared with figures from previous years. Amnesty International analysts argue that this drop is only temporary since the figure includes only confirmed executions and are likely to be much higher [REF]. As of 2008, China is still the country with the highest number of executions. 1,718 people have been executed in 2008 out of 2,390 worldwide [REF]. 

A total of 68 crimes are punishable by death; capital offenses include non-violent, white-collar crimes such as embezzlement and tax fraud. Execution methods include lethal injections and shooting [REF]. The People's Armed Police carries out the executions, usually at 10&nbsp;am [REF].

Although China outlawed torture in 1996, human rights groups say brutality and degradation are common in Chinese detention centres. 

In May 2010, new regulations were issued that nullified evidence gathered through violence or intimidation. The move came after a public outcry following the revelation that a farmer, convicted for murder based on his confession under torture, was in fact innocent. The case came to light only when his supposed victim turned up alive and the defendant had spent 10 years in prison [REF]. International human rights groups gave the change a cautious welcome [REF].

In 2002, Human Rights Watch published the book Dangerous Minds: Political Psychiatry in China Today and its Origins in the Mao Era written by Robin Munro and based on the documents obtained by him [REF]. The British researcher Robin Munro, a sinologist who was writing his dissertation in London after a long sojourn in China, had travelled to China several times to survey libraries in provincial towns and had gathered a large amount of literature which bore the stamp ‘secret’ but at the same time was openly available [REF]. This literature included even historical analyses going back to the days of the Cultural Revolution and concerned articles and reports on the number of people who were taken to mental hospitals because they complained of a series of issues [REF]. It was found, according to Munro, that the involuntary confinement of religious groups, political dissidents, and whistleblowers had a lengthy history in China [REF]. The abuse had begun in the 1950s and 1960s, and had grown extremely prevalent throughout the Cultural Revolution [REF]. During the period of the Cultural Revolution, from 1966 to 1976, it achieved its apogee, then under the reign of Mao Zedong and the Gang of Four, which established a very repressive and harsh regime [REF]. No deviance or opposition in thought or in practice was tolerated [REF]. 

The documents told of a massive abuse of psychiatry for political purposes during the leadership of Mao Zedong, during which millions of people had been declared mentally sick [REF]. In the 1980s, according to the official documents, there was political connotation to fifteen percent of all forensic psychiatric cases [REF]. In the early 1990s, the numbers had dropped to five percent, but with beginning of the campaign against Falun Gong, the percentage had again increased quite rapidly [REF]. 

Chinese official psychiatric literature testifies distinctly that the Communist Party's notion of ‘political dangerousness’ was long since institutionally engrafted in the diagnostic armory of China's psychiatry and included in the main concept of psychiatric dangerousness [REF]. 

The People’s Republic of China is the only country which appears to abuse psychiatry for political purposes in a systematic way, and despite international criticism, this seems to be continuing [REF]. Political abuse of psychiatry in the People’s Republic of China is high on the agenda and has produced recurring disputes in the international psychiatric community [REF]. The abuses there appear to be even more widespread than in the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s and involve the incarceration of ‘petitioners’, human rights workers, trade union activists, followers of the Falun Gong movement, and people complaining against injustices by local authorities [REF]. 

It also seemed that, China had hardly known high security forensic institutions until 1989 [REF]. However, since then, the Chinese authorities have constructed the entire network of special forensic mental hospitals called Ankang which in Chinese is for ‘Peace and Health.’[REF] By that time, China had had 20 Ankang institutions with the staff employed by the Ministry of State Security [REF]. The psychiatrists who worked there were wearing uniforms under their white coats [REF]. 

The political abuse of psychiatry in China seems to take place only in the institutions under the authority of the police and the Ministry of State Security but not in those belonging to other governmental sectors [REF]. Psychiatric care in China falls into four sectors that hardly connect up with each other [REF]. These are Ankang institutions of the Ministry of State Security; those belonging to the police; those that fall under the authority of the Ministry of Social Affairs; those belonging to the Ministry of Health [REF]. Both the sectors belonging to the police and the Ministry of State Security are the closed sectors, and, consequently, information hardly ever leaks out [REF]. In the hospitals belonging to the Ministry of Health, psychiatrists do not contact with the Ankang institutions and had no idea of what occurred there, and could sincerely state that they were not informed of political abuse of psychiatry in China [REF]. 

In China, the structure of forensic psychiatry was to a great extent identical to that in the USSR [REF]. On its own, it is not so strange, since psychiatrists of the Moscow Serbsky Institute visited Beijing in 1957 to help their Chinese ‘brethren’, the same psychiatrists who promoted the system of political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union [REF]. As a consequence, diagnostics were not much different than in the Soviet Union [REF]. The only difference was that the Soviets preferred ‘sluggish schizophrenia’ as a diagnosis, and the Chinese generally cleaved to the diagnosis ‘paranoia’ or ‘paranoid schizophrenia’ [REF]. However, the results were the same: long hospitalization in a mental hospital, involuntary treatment with neuroleptics, torture, abuse, all aimed at breaking the victim’s will [REF]. 

As Mr. Liu’s database suggests, today’s most frequent victims of psychiatric abuse are political dissidents, petitioners, and Falun Gong members [REF]. In the beginning of 2000s, Human Rights Watch accused China of locking up Falun Gong members and dissidents in a number of Chinese mental hospitals managed by the Public Security Bureau [REF]. Access to the hospitals was requested by the World Psychiatric Association (WPA), but denied by China, and the controversy subsided [REF]. 

The WPA attempted to confine the problem by presenting it as Falun Gong issue and, at the same time, make the impression that the members of the movement were likely not mentally sound, that it was a sect which likely brainwashed its members, etc [REF]. There was even a diagnosis of ‘qigong syndrome’ which was used reflecting on the exercises practiced by Falun Gong [REF]. It was the unfair game aiming to avoid the political abuse of psychiatry from dominating the WPA agenda [REF]. 

In August 2002, the General Assembly was to take place during the next WPA World Congress in Yokohama [REF]. The issue of Chinese political abuse of psychiatry had been placed as one of the final items on the agenda of the General Assembly [REF]. When the issue was broached during the General Assembly, the exact nature of compromise came to light [REF]. In order to investigate the political abuse of psychiatry, the WPA would send an investigative mission to China [REF]. The visit was projected for the spring of 2003 in order to assure that one could present a report during the annual meeting of the British Royal College of Psychiatrists in June/July of that year and the Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association in May of the same year [REF]. After the 2002 World Congress, the WPA Executive Committee’s half-hearted attitude in Yokohama came to light: it was an omen of a longstanding policy of diversion and postponement [REF]. The 2003 investigative mission never took place, and when finally a visit to China did take place, this visit was more of scientific exchange [REF]. In the meantime, the political abuse of psychiatry persisted unabatedly, nevertheless the WPA did not seem to care [REF].

There are 55 recognized ethnic minorities in China. Article 4 of the Chinese constitution states "All nationalities in the People's Republic of China are equal", and the government argues that it has made efforts to improve ethnic education and increased ethnic representation in local government. 

Some policies cause reverse racism, where Han Chinese or even ethnic minorities from other regions are treated as second-class citizens in the ethnic region [REF]. In the same line, there are wide-ranging preferential policies (i.e. affirmative actions) in place to promote social and economic developments for ethnic minorities, including preferential employments, political appointments, and business loans [REF]. Universities typically have quota reserved for ethnic minorities despite having lower admission test scores [REF]. Ethnic minorities are also exempt from the one-child policy which is aimed toward Han Chinese. 

Stern punishments towards independence-seeking demonstrators, rioters, or terrorists[REF] have led to mistreatment of the Tibetan and Uyghur minorities in Western China. The United States in 2007 refused to help repatriate five Chinese Uyghur Guantanamo Bay detainees because of the "past treatment of the Uigur minority" [REF]. On the other hand, China has many border regions with large minority populations, including Guangxi with 16&nbsp;million Zhuang people, and other concentrated Muslim populations such as the Hui people, with some even poorer than the Uyghurs, such as the Dongxiang, Bonan, and the Salar, among whom there have been "no reports of separatism, violence, or even Islamic radicalism". The fellow Muslim Kazakhs, who live with the Uyghurs in the Xinjiang area under similar laws and conditions, have not organized rebellions against the state or aligned themselves with Kazakhstan [REF].

Tibetans who opposed the diversion of irrigation water by Chinese authorities to the China Gold International Resources mining operations were detained, tortured and murdered [REF].
Judicial mutilation against Tibetans by the Dalai Lama's government, and the serfdom controversy have been cited by the PRC as reasons to interfere for the welfare of Tibetans [REF]. Conflicting reports about Tibetan human rights have evolved since then. The PRC claims a Tibetan cultural revival since the 1950s, while the Dalai Lama says "whether intentionally or unintentionally, somewhere cultural genocide is taking place" [REF]. 

Following the Chinese economic reform, businesspeople from other parts of China have traveled to Tibet to do business, although most do not stay in region. The New York Times has cited this ethnic diversity in Tibet as a cause of "ethnic tensions". It has also criticized China's promotion of home ownership among nomadic Tibetans [REF]. Western politicians often level the charge that the Tibetan languages are at risk of extinction in Tibet [REF]. However, academics point out that for the vast majority of Tibetans, who live in rural areas, the Chinese language is merely introduced as a second language in secondary [REF].

According to the Der Spiegel magazine, despite the National People's Congress enacting a law in 2007 to protect private property with the exception of land, local Chinese authorities have used brutal means to expropriate property, in a bid to profit from the construction boom [REF].

Worker's rights and privacy are other contentious human rights issues in China. There have been several reports of core International Labor Organization conventions being denied to workers. One such report was released by the International Labor Rights Fund in October 2006 documenting minimum wage violations, long work hours, and inappropriate actions towards workers by management [REF]. Workers cannot form their own unions in the workplace, only being able to join State-sanctioned ones. The extent to which these organizations can fight for the rights of Chinese workers is disputed [REF]. 

The issue of refugees from North Korea is a recurring one. It is official policy to repatriate them to North Korea, but the policy is not evenly enforced and a considerable number of them stay in the People's Republic (some move on to other countries). Though it is in contravention of international law to deport political refugees, as illegal immigrants their situation is precarious. Their rights are not always protected [REF]. Some of them are tricked into marriage or prostitution [REF]. 

African students in China have complained about their treatment in China, that was largely ignored until 1988-9, when "students rose up in protest against what they called 'Chinese apartheid'" [REF]. African officials took notice of the issue, and the Organization of African Unity issued an official protest. The organization's chairman, Mali's president Moussa Traoré, went on a fact-finding mission to China [REF]. According to a Guardian 1989 Third World Report titled "Chinese apartheid" threatens links with Africa, these practices could threaten Peking's entire relationship with the continent."[REF] .

The Government of the People's Republic of China has argued that idea of "Asian values"[REF] means that the "welfare" of the collective should always be put ahead of the rights of any individual whenever conflicts between these arise. It argues that there is a responsibility of the government to create a "harmonious society",[REF] and that in some cases it is necessary to persuade or force individuals to make sacrifices in their rights for the wider needs of society. It argues that a strong and stable authority is required in order to regulate the potentially conflicting interests of the public and enforce a compromise and that Governments with curtailed authority would fail to take on such a responsibility. 

The Chinese government points towards an alleged rapid social deterioration in Western societies, claiming that there has been an increase in geographic, religious and racial segregation; rising crime rates; family breakdown; industrial action; vandalism; and political extremism within Western societies. They believe these are a direct result of an excess of individual freedom, saying that “Too much freedom is dangerous.”[REF]
China argues that these actions in Western Nations are all violations of human rights. China believes that these should be taken into account when assessing a country's human right records. Furthermore, the government criticizes the United States, which publishes human rights reports annually, by insisting that the United States has also caused human rights abuses such as the invasion of Iraq [REF]. 

The PRC government also argues that the notion of human rights should include economic standards of living and measures of health and economic prosperity [REF]. On cultural grounds they argue that as the economic, cultural and political situations differ substantially between countries, a universal 'one-size-fits-all' definition of human rights should not apply internationally.

In March 2003, an amendment was made to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, stating "The State respects and preserves human rights."[REF] In addition, China was dropped from a list of top 10 human rights violators in the annual human rights report released by the U.S. State Department in 2008, while the report indicated that there were still widespread problems in China [REF]. 

Since 1988, the Chinese government began direct village elections to help maintain social and political order whilst facing rapid economic change. Elections now occur in "about 650,000 villages across China, reaching 75% of the nation's 1.3&nbsp;billion people," according to the Carter Center [REF]. In 2008, Shenzhen –which enjoys the highest per capita GDP in China– was selected for experimentation, and over 70% of the government officials on the district level are to be directly elected [REF]. However, in keeping with Communist Party philosophy, candidates must be selected from a pre-approved list [REF].Since 1949, the government of People's Republic of China has actively promoted the social, economic and political roles of women in society. While advancing progress in promoting equality among men and women, the efforts met resistance in a traditionally Neo-Confucian society of male superiority.

"In 1949, when the PRC was founded, employed women accounted for only 7 percent of the workforce; in 1992, however, the figure was 38 percent. Women's contribution to family income went from 20 percent in the 1950s to 40 percent in the 1990s. In 1982, Chinese working women made up 43 percent of the total population, higher than the percentages enjoyed by American women (35.3 percent) or Japanese women (36 percent)."
[REF] .

Continuation of one’s family line is important in the traditional Chinese marriage system. The parents of the soon-to-be groom and bride arrange the marriage with an emphasis on the alliance between the two families [REF]. The Chou Dynasty (951-960) was marked by the emergence of two types of marriages, purchased and arranged, which focused on the Chinese woman’s fundamental duty to produce children [REF]. Although the woman’s role varied slightly depending on the social status of the husband, typically her main duty was to provide a son in order to continue the family name [REF]. An arranged marriage was accomplished by a matchmaker who acted as a link between two families [REF]. The exchange of monetary compensation for a women’s hand in marriage is defined as a purchase marriage [REF].In purchase marriages, women were seen as property, which could be sold and traded at the husband’s whim [REF]. 

Following the establishment of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the Marriage Law of 1950 was enacted [REF]. The Marriage Law banned arranged and forced marriages and shifted focus away from the dominance of men and onto the interests of the children and women [REF]. Adults, both men and women, gained the right to lawful divorce [REF]. The marriage law of 1980 forbid mercenary marriages in which a bride price or dowry is paid. The law prohibited the exaction of money or gifts in connection with any marriage arrangements [REF]. Bride price payments are still common in rural areas, whereas dowries have become smaller and less common practice [REF]. Similarly in urban areas, the dowry custom has nearly disappeared. The bride price custom has transformed into providing gifts for the bride or her family [REF].

The phenomenon of de facto polygamy, or so-called "second wives" (二奶 èrnǎi in Chinese), has reemerged in recent years [REF]. There are many villages in southern part of China where predominantly such women live. 
[REF] This situation has created many social and legal issues .

Prior to the creation of the Marriage Law of 1950, there were three commonly used methods to dissolve a marriage: no-fault divorce, state mandated marriage annulment, and independent divorce at the discretion of the husband [REF]. The Tang Dynasty (618-906 CE) recognized that a marriage filled with incompatibility could be dissolved with approval from the husband. This type of divorce is classified as a no-fault divorce, whereas a state mandated marriage annulment is only applicable when a serious offense has been committed on the spouse or his or her family. If the husband’s decision to dissolve the marriage satisfied one of seven specified reasons, then it was deemed an independent divorce and was legally recognized [REF]. Typically the decision to divorce was at the discretion of the husband not the wife [REF]. 

The Marriage Law, which legalized divorces for both men and women, resulted in an increase in divorce rates. As women began divorcing their husbands, tensions increased and much resistance was met from rural males. Although divorce was now legally recognized, thousands of women lost their lives for attempting to divorce their husbands and some committed suicide when the right to divorce was withheld [REF]. Divorce, once seen as a rare act during the Mao era (1949-1976), has become more common with rates continuing to increase today [REF]. The Marriage Law was amended in 2003 to reflect more reasons for divorce and to shorten the application process. The new law now recognizes infidelity as a justification for divorce [REF].

The lack of public awareness of the Marriage Law of 2005, which prohibits domestic violence, has allowed spousal abuse to persist. In 2004 the All-China Women’s Federation compiled survey results to show that thirty percent of the women in China experienced domestic violence within their homes [REF]. An significant increase in the prevalence of domestic violence in the People's Republic of China involving Chinese women committing violence against Chinese men. In 2003, 10 percent of violence in families involved male victims. The wives beat their husbands, and some cut off their penises. In Wuxi in Jiangsu province a man had his penis cut off by his wife [REF].

Foot binding was conceptualized as early as the 6th century, but did not become popular until the 13th century. The process of bending a woman’s feet, breaking the arches, and wrapping the toes against the feet is the ancient traditional of foot binding, which has since been outlawed [REF]. Foot binding was performed to create smaller looking feet with intense arches [REF]. Society viewed these smaller feet as attractive. Special shoes were created to highlight the beauty of the bound foot size [REF]. The practice soon became a cultural norm and a requirement for marriage as mothers bound the feet of their daughters [REF]. Although the feet were seen as beautiful, the process of foot binding was painful and left many women immobile, confining them to their homes [REF]. Bound feet became the mark of women in high class because few lower class women had the opportunity to bind their feet due to the dependence on normal walking to complete house work [REF]. Foot binding has since been outlawed multiple times. In 1949 the practice of foot binding was finally banned [REF].

The gender gap in current enrollment widens with age because males are more likely to be enrolled than females at every age group in the People's Republic of China [REF]. 1961 marked the sudden decrease in female enrollment in primary and secondary school. Female primary school enrollment suffered more then that of males during the Great Chinese Famine (1958-1961) [REF]. Although the gender gap for secondary and primary education has narrowed over time, the gender gap at the highest education level remains much larger [REF]. The One Percent Population Survey in 1987 found that in rural areas 48 percent of males aged 45 and above were illiterate while 6 percent of males 15-19 years old were illiterate. Although the percentage of illiterate women decreased significantly 88 percent to 15 percent, it is still significantly higher than the percentage of illiterate men for the same age groupings [REF]. 

Education is instrumental for the empowerment of women and children [REF]. Education, which is typically granted to adolescent boys instead of young girls, contributes to women’s overall subordinate position [REF]. In order for gender equality in this realm of life to be achieved, a strategy that enhances the educational involvement, preservation, and accomplishment of adolescent females and women is fundamental [REF].

In traditional Chinese culture, which was based on Confucius ideologies in a patriarchal society, women did not possess priority in healthcare. Males were viewed as superior and as a result healthcare was tailored to focus on them [REF]. Chinese healthcare has since undergone much reform and has tried to provide Chinese women equal healthcare as men. The People’s Republic of China began to shift their focus onto the enforcement of healthcare for women. This change was apparent, when the women in the Chinese workforce were granted health care. Healthcare policy required all women workers to receive urinalysis and vaginal examinations yearly [REF]. The People's Republic of China has enacted various laws to protect the healthcare rights of women, including the Maternal and Child Care law. This law and numerous others focused on protecting the rights of all women in the People's Republic of China. 

Gender discrimination has contributed to the millions of missing women of China [REF]. Over 100 million women are missing globally, with 50 million women missing from China alone [REF]. This trend of missing women contradicts biological research, which suggests that men are more susceptible to certain illnesses than women, resulting in lower survival rates [REF].

In 1956, the Chinese government publicly announced its goal to control the exponentially increasing population size. The government planned to use education and publicity as their main modes of increasing awareness [REF]. Zhou Enlai launched the first program for smaller families under the guidance of Madame Li Teh-chuan, the Minister of Health at the time. During this time, family planning and contraceptive usage were highly publicized and encouraged [REF]. The government successfully reformed the image of the traditional Chinese family. The traditional family once larger had now shrunk to include only a father, mother, and their one child [REF]. 

Mainland China has a highly masculine sex ratio. The sex ratio at birth (between male and female births) in mainland China reached 117:100 in the year 2000, substantially more masculine than the natural baseline, which ranges between 103:100 and 107:100. It had risen from 108:100 in 1981—at the boundary of the natural baseline—to 111:100 in 1990 [REF]. According to a report by the State Population and Family Planning Commission, there will be 30 million more men than women in 2020, potentially leading to social instability [REF]. The correlation between the increase of masculine sex ratio disparity on birth and the deployment of one child policy would appear to have been caused by the one-child policy. 

However, other Asian regions also have higher than average ratios, including Taiwan (110:100) , which does not have a family planning policy [REF]. Many studies have explored the reason for the gender-based birthrate disparity in China as well as other countries. A study in 1990 attributed the high preponderance of reported male births in mainland China to four main causes: diseases which affect females more severely than males; the result of widespread under-reporting of female births;[REF] the illegal practice of sex-selective abortion made possible by the widespread availability of ultrasound; and finally, acts of child abandonment and infanticide.

When the focus on family planning decreased in Puning, a city in the southern province of Guangdong, executive family planning officials mandated a reduction in Puning’s birthrates to satisfy national allowances [REF]. In 2010, the Puning officials on family planning held the Iron Fist Campaign. This campaign targeted individuals for sterilization in an attempt to reduce birthrates [REF]. Approximately 10,000 female violators of the Republic of China’s One-child policy were targeted for sterilization by a task force of 600 local officials [REF]. The targeted women were asked to go to governmental clinics where they would be sterilized. If they refused the procedure, then they put their families at risk for detainment and in some cases the women themselves were detained [REF]. Although the Iron Fist Campaign, which lasted for 20 days, targeted 10,000 individuals, approximately 50 percent consented and 1,377 people were detained [REF].

Gender inequalities in China extend outside of the home and into the labor force. Even though women in China are actively contributing to the paid labor force at an extent that exceeds numerous other countries, equality in the workforce has yet to be reached [REF].

In traditional China, land was passed down from father to son and in the case of no son, the land was then given to a close male relative [REF]. Although in the past women in China were not granted ownership of land, today in rural areas of the People’s Republic of China, women possess pivotal roles in farming, which allows them control over the area’s central sources of production [REF]. Population greatly affects the mode of farming that is utilized, which determines the duties women have in farming [REF]. Shifting cultivation is utilized in less populated areas and results in women performing more of the agricultural duties, whereas in more populated areas complicated plough cultivation is used [REF]. Men typically perform plough cultivation but during periods of high demand women pitch in with agricultural duties of planting, harvesting and transporting [REF]. Women also have key roles in tea cultivation and double cropping rice [REF]. Agricultural income is supplemented by women’s work in animal rearing, spinning, basket construction, weaving, and the production of other various crafts [REF].

In the private sector, Chinese law mandates the coverage of maternity leave and costs of childbirth. These maternity laws have led to employers’ reluctance to hire women [REF]. 

The People's Republic of China’s dependence on low-wage manufacturing to produce goods for the international market is due to changes in China’s economic policies [REF]. These economic policies have also encouraged the industrialization movement to export goods [REF]. Urban industrial areas are staffed with young migrant women workers who leave their rural homes. Since males are more likely than females to attend college, rural females often migrate to urban employment in hopes of supplementing their families’ incomes [REF]. Factories in urban areas manufactured toys, clothing, electronics, and footwear primarily for exportation into the international world market. In various cities, such as Hong Kong, export targeted industrialization dominated the economy with 70 percent of the population being comprised of migrant workers [REF]. 

In 1984 the reform of the Regulations of Permanent Residence Registration marked an increase in the migration of rural Chinese workers. As the restrictions on residence became more lenient, less penalizing, and permitted people to travel to find employment, more women engaged in migrant labor [REF]. In the cities, women could find low paying work as factory workers. These increased employment opportunities drew women out of rural areas in hopes of escaping poverty [REF]. Although this reformed system enabled the migration of rural residents, it prohibited them from accepting any benefits in the cities or changing their permanent residence, which led to a majority of migrant workers not receiving any forms of medical care, education, or housing [REF]. Currently 90 percent of migrant workers violate the Chinese labour law by working without contracts [REF]. 

Women migrant workers outnumber males 2:1 [REF]. 80 percent of the migrant workers were women in the Nanshan district of Shenzhen. The Shenzhen Special Economic Zone in 2003 employed 5.5 million migrant workers with 70 percent of the workers being female [REF]. 
A preference for younger women over older women, has led to a predominantly young population of migrant workers.[31] Married women have more restrictions on mobility due to duties to the family, whereas younger women are more likely to not be married. Also, younger rural women are less likely to become pregnant, possess nimble fingers, more able to work longer hours, and are less knowledgeable about their statutory rights [REF]. For the women who are able to gain employment, they then face the possibility of being forced to sign a contract prohibiting them from getting pregnant or married during their period of employment [REF].

Women in China have low participation rates as political leaders. Women’s disadvantage is most evident in
their severe underrepresentation in the more powerful, political, positions [REF]. At the top level of decision making, no woman has ever been among the nine members of the Standing Committee of the Communist Party’s Politburo. Just 3 of 27 government ministers are women, and importantly, since 1997, China has fallen to 53rd place from 16th in the world in terms of female representation at its parliament, the National People’s Congress, according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union [REF]. The trend will likely continue due to a low proportion of women heads in villagers’ committees [REF].

Young women and girls are kidnapped from their homes and sold to gangs of women traffickers that displace the women by great distances [REF]. In order to ensure that the women do not run away, the men who purchase them do not allow the women to leave the house [REF]. Often times the documentation and papers are taken from the trafficked women [REF]. Many women become pregnant and have children, which commits them to the family and fosters a sense of duty [REF]. The People’s Republic of China’s government outlawed the trafficking of women when Mao Zedong was in power. If it is discovered that a man has purchased his wife, then he may face jail time and if prosecuted for trafficking, he may be executed [REF].

Shortly after taking power in 1949, the Communist Party of China embarked upon a series of campaigns that purportedly eradicated prostitution from mainland China by the early 1960s. However, since the loosening of government controls over society in the early 1980s, prostitution in mainland China not only has become more visible, but also can now be found throughout both urban and rural areas. In spite of government efforts, prostitution has now developed to the extent that it comprises an industry, one that involves a great number of people and produces a considerable economic output. Prostitution has also become associated with a number of problems, including organized crime, government corruption and sexually transmitted diseases."Birth tourism" is a term for travelling to a country that practices birthright citizenship in order to give birth there, so that the child will be a citizen of the destination country.

The Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution guarantees U.S. citizenship to those born on its territory, provided the person is "subject to the jurisdiction" of the United States. 

This practice is believed to be popular among women in Korea, Hong Kong, and Taiwan [REF]. According to Edward Chang, a scholar of Asian American Studies at the University of California, Riverside, the practice is popular among the elite and wealthy circles of South Korea. Temporary homes for these mothers are often located in residential neighborhoods, which neighbors allege decrease the quality of life in the neighborhood, primarily due to increases in traffic and other business-like effects. "It's easy. If you register the birth, it's automatic that your baby can get an American passport," said Kim Jeong Yeon, a Korean woman who traveled to the United States on a tourist visa while six months pregnant [REF]. Like many other women, Kim spent thousands of dollars to have a company arrange the travel. "If they could afford it, all my friends would go to the United States to have their babies," she said [REF]. 

In California, three Chinese-owned "baby care centers" offer expectant mothers a place to give birth to an American citizen for a fee of $14,750, which includes shopping and sightseeing trips. "We don't encourage moms to break the law — just to take advantage of it," explains Robert Zhou, the agency's owner. Zhou says that he and his wife have helped up to 600 women give birth in the United States within the last five years. In fact, they started the business after traveling to the United States to have a child of their own. Zhou explains that the number of agencies like his has soared in the past five years [REF]. Zhou believes that a cheaper education is often a motivating factor and his pitch to prospective clients includes the notion that public education in the United States is "free." One of his clients, Christina Chuo, explains that her parents "paid a huge amount of money for their education" in the United States because they were foreign students; having an American citizen child permits her child to acquire the same education at a lower tuition. She also noted that she and her husband were not interested in permanently immigrating to the United States, "except, perhaps, when they retire."[REF] Other options exist where mainlanders can deliver babies in Saipan, US commonwealth where the cost is 70,000 yuan and does not require any US citizenship [REF]. Congress representatives such as Phil Gingrey have tried to put an end to birth tourism, who said these people are "gaming the system" [REF]. 

Birth tourism from Turkey is also reportedly popular. According to Selin Burcuoglu, a Turkish woman who traveled to the United States to give birth last year, the process was easy: "We found a company on the Internet and decided to go to Austin for our child's birth. It was incredibly professional. They organized everything for me. I had no problem adjusting and I had an excellent birth. I don’t want her to deal with visa issues — American citizenship has so many advantages."[REF] Birth tourism can be a lucrative business for immigrants who facilitate the travel and birthing process for their former countrymen. Turkish doctors, hotel owners, and immigrant families in the United States have reportedly arranged the U.S. birth of 12,000 Turkish children since 2003. The Turkish-owned Marmara Hotel group offers a "birth tourism package" that includes accommodations at their Manhattan branch. "We hosted 15 families last year," said Nur Ercan Mağden, head manager of The Marmara Manhattan, adding that the cost was $45,000 each [REF]. 

Similarly, the Tucson Medical Center (TMC) in Arizona offers a "birth package" to expectant mothers and actively recruits in Mexico. Expectant mothers can schedule a Caesarean or simply arrive a few weeks before their due date. The cost reportedly ranges from $2,300 to $4,600 and includes a hospital stay, exams, and a massage. Additional children trigger a surcharge of $500 [REF]. 

The Nigerian media is also focused on birth tourism in the United States and recently published an article titled, "American Agitations Threaten a Nigerian Practice." The practice referred to is that of Nigerians traveling to the United States to have a child — a practice that, according to the newspaper, is "spreading so fast that it is close to becoming an obsession."[REF] . 

Being U.S. citizens, these children do not have to meet the stricter international student rules to enter U.S. universities and colleges. In addition, when they turn 21, they become eligible to petition for a grant of permanent residency for their parents through family reunification. Some prospective mothers misrepresent their intentions of coming to the United States, a violation of U.S. immigration law. However, it is not illegal for a woman to come to the U.S. to give birth [REF]. 

The Center for Health Care Statistics estimates that there were 7,462 births to foreign residents in the United States in 2008, the most recent year for which statistics are available. That is a small fraction of the roughly 4.3 million total births that year. Once these children turn 21, they are eligible to petition for their parents to join them as residents [REF]. The Center for Immigration Studies, a think tank which favors limits on immigration, estimates that there are approximately 40,000 annual births to parents in the United States as birth tourists [REF]. However, total births to temporary immigrants in the United States (e.g. tourists, students, guestworkers) could be as high as 200,000 [REF].

Canada's citizenship law has, since 1947, generally conferred Canadian citizenship at birth to anyone born in Canada, regardless of the citizenship or immigration status of the parents. The only exception is for children born in Canada to representatives of foreign governments or international organizations. The Canadian government has considered limiting jus soli citizenship,[REF] and continues to debate the issue[REF] but has not yet changed this part of Canadian law.

According to the Basic Law of Hong Kong, Chinese citizens born in Hong Kong have the right of abode in the territory; i.e. all the citizenship rights accorded to residents of Hong Kong. A 2001 court case Director of Immigration v. Chong Fung Yuen affirmed that this right extends to the children of mainland Chinese parents who themselves are not residents of Hong Kong [REF]. As a result, there has been an influx of mainland mothers giving birth in Hong Kong in order to obtain right of abode for the child. In 2009, 36% of babies born in Hong Kong were born to parents originating from Mainland China [REF]. This has resulted in backlash from some circles in Hong Kong of increase and potential stress on the territory's social welfare net and education system [REF]. Attempts to restrict benefits from such births have been struck down by the territory's courts [REF]. Segments of the Hong Kong population has reacted negatively to the phenomenon, which has exacerbated social and cultural tensions between Hong Kong and mainland China. The situation came to a boiling point in early 2012, with Hong Kongers taking to the street to protest the influx of birth tourism from mainland China.

Irish nationality law included birth citizenship until the 27th Amendment was passed by referendum in 2004. The amendment was preceded by media reports of heavily pregnant women claiming political asylum, who expected that even if their application was rejected, they would be allowed to remain in the country if their new baby was a citizen [REF].The Chinese kinship system () is classified as a Sudanese kinship system (also referred to as the "Descriptive system") used to define family. Identified by Lewis Henry Morgan in his 1871 work Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family, the Sudanese system is one of the six major kinship systems together with Eskimo, Hawaiian, Iroquois, Crow, and Omaha. 

The Sudanese kinship system (and hence the Chinese kinship system), is the most complicated of all kinship systems. It maintains a separate designation for almost every one of ego's kin based on their generation, their lineage, their relative age, and their gender. 

In the Chinese kinship system:

Maternal and paternal lineages are distinguished. For example, a mother's brother and a father's brother have different terms. 
The relative age of a sibling relation is considered. For example, a father's younger brother has a different terminology than his older brother. 
The gender of the relative is distinguished, as in English. 
The generation from ego is indicated, like in English. 

Chinese kinship is agnatic, emphasising patrilineality.

Kinship terms appeared in the earliest Chinese lexicon, Erya. Chapter Four 釋親 is dedicated to an explanation of kinship and marriage. Another lexicon from late Han Dynasty, Shiming, has a detailed list of forms of address for all relatives. 

With the influence of Confucianism, the concepts of kinship and consanguinity are deeply ingrained in Chinese culture. One of the Confucian teachings is filial piety, which it is extended to a series of five relationships known as the Five Cardinal Relationships (五倫),[REF] three of which are related to the family: . 

ruler and subject (君臣 jūnchén)
father and son (父子 fùzǐ)
elder and younger brother (兄弟 xiōngdì)
husband and wife (夫婦 fūfù)
between friends (朋友 péngyǒu) . 

In the Three Character Classic, the nine agnates are listed in the following stanza: 

高曾祖父而身身而子子而孫 Great-great-grandfather, great-grandfather, grandfather, father and self, self and son, son and grandson,
. |- 自子孫至玄曾乃九族人之倫 from son and grandson, on to great-grandson and great-great-grandson. These are the nine agnates, constituting the kinships of man.

In Chinese culture where the extended family is still valued, kinship terms have survived well into current usage. Also, since it is taboo to refer to or address a more senior family relation by his or her given name, the kinship term is the only possible term of address. When there are many siblings as in many Post–World War II baby-boom families, the relation is distinguished and addressed according to age or rank. For example 大 (great/senior/elder) is used in the address for 大姨 (the eldest sister of one's mother); 二姨 for the second eldest sister of one's mother; 三姨 for the third eldest sister of one's mother, etc. In cases where someone is older than his more senior relation, such as an uncle, it is common to address the senior relation with a diminutive suffix. 

Because some of these terms have no equivalent in foreign languages, they are not easily translated and the descriptiveness is often lost in translation. However, terms such as "Second Uncle" are sometimes used [REF]. Translating kinship terms from other languages often presents the problem of ambiguity as there is no equivalent general term such as "aunt". 

Despite the complexity of the kinship address system (see terminology section below), it is common to simplify it for the sake of familiarity. Some formal kinship terms are not familiar to many people, cumbersome, or not preferred by the addressee. For example, a cousin once removed may at her discretion be referred to as simply a cousin if she is of a similar age to the speaker.

The Great Qing Legal Code (《大清律例》) was the last set of Chinese laws where the complete kinship terms were shown. The Qing code not only confirmed the importance of defining kinship relations, but also defined the legal and moral conducts between family relations. Although there was no specific statute in the Qing code to define kinship terms, it specified the mourning attire and ritual appropriate according to the relation between the mourner and the deceased. Kinship relationships also played a crucial role in the administration of justice under the Qing. Penalties were more severe for crimes committed against senior relatives within the family hierarchy. Crimes committed against those outside of the extended family were punished less harshly. Crimes committed by senior family members against their inferiors were least likely to elicit harsh sentences. 

Among the 47 statutes added in 1740 under Qianlong Emperor, Statute 2 (Charts/Tables of Mourning Attire, 《喪服諸圖》) and Statute 3 (Code of Attire, 《服制》) dealt with mourning attire completed with charts. According to Qing law, one had to observe a period of mourning when a relative died. The closer and more senior the deceased family member, the longer the period of mourning is dictated by law. The mourning period range from three months to three years. During this period, the bereaved had to stay at home, excuse himself from public service, refrain from celebrations of all sorts, and practice abstinence, among other things. 

The "extermination of nine kindreds" (誅九族) is considered one of the most severe punishments found in traditional Chinese law enforced until the end of Qing. The practice of exterminating the kins had been established since Qin when Emperor Qin Shi Huang (reigned 247 BC–221 BC) declared "Those who criticize the present with that of the past: Zu" (以古非今者族). Zu (族) referred to the "extermination of three kindreds" (三族): father, son and grandson. The extermination was to ensure the elimination of challenges to the throne and political enemies. Emperor Wen of Sui (reigned 581–604) abolished the practice but it was reintroduced by succeeding Emperor Yang (reigned 604–617). Not only did he bring back the punishment, but he also extended it to the nine kindreds. 

In the first year of the reign of the Yongle Emperor (Ming dynasty, reigned 1402–1424), the prominent historian Fāng Xìao-rú (方孝孺) committed an offense worthy of the "extermination of nine kindreds" for refusing to write the inaugural address and for insulting the Emperor. He was recorded as saying in defiance to the would-be Emperor: "莫說九族，十族何妨！" ("Never mind nine agnates, go ahead with ten!"). Thus he was granted his wish with an infamous case, perhaps the only one, of "extermination of ten kindreds" (誅十族) in the history of China. In addition to the blood relations from his nine-agnates family hierarchy, his students and peers were added to be the tenth group. Altogether 873 people were said to have been executed. 

To this day, a three-character term for "death to the entire family" remains a powerful curse in the Cantonese language.

A Chinese clan is a patrilineal and patrilocal group of related Chinese people with a common surname sharing a common ancestor. In southern China, clan members could form a village known as an ancestral village. In Hong Kong, clan settlement is exemplified by walled villages. An ancestral village usually features a hall and shrine honouring ancestral clan members. A clan pedigree can be found recording male members of the clan. A married woman is considered part of her husband's clan.

Marriage is an important rite signifying the coming together of two clans and the beginning of a new family unit. Marriage has to be permanent and issues are expected.

Polygamy (specifically polygyny) had been practised in Chinese societies for thousands of years. Since the Han Dynasty, Chinese men have been able to legally have only one wife. It was common for privileged Chinese men to have a wife and various concubines, however. For those who could afford a dowry and support a family of multiple concubines and children, polygyny provided a better chance of issuing heirs. The importance of this was apparent in the imperial court usually housing hundreds of concubines. Aside from concubinage, having multiple wives with equal status was also accepted prior to the ban on polygamy. 

In a concubinage situation, the wife, concubines and their children would live in the same household. Wives and concubines would often refer to each other as "sisters". As a concubine was not wedded in a marriage ceremony, she had fewer rights in the household. There was also no inter-clan relation between the man's clan and the concubine's own kin. 

Polygamy was banned in China in 1930 when the Republic of China government promulgated Civil Code (Part IV) where Section 985 states "A person who has a spouse may not contract another marriage. A person shall not marry with two or more persons simultaneously." [REF]. This is still in effect today in the territories under effective administration of the Republic of China including Taiwan and Kinmen and Matsu. After the establishment of the People's Republic of China by the Chinese Communists on the mainland, this banning is reaffirmed in the passage of the Marriage Code of 1950. In Hong Kong, new polygomous marriages were no longer legally allowed after 1971 with the passage of the Marriage Act. Despite this, incidents of extramarital affairs are rising. Some men have even established a family with their mistresses and children kept secret to their wives. There is a phenomenon of cross-border polygyny usually involving Hong Kong men and their mistresses living in Mainland China.

With modern Chinese governments advocating smaller families through family planning campaigns and policy-making, large extended families may be a thing of the past. The People's Republic of China introduced its One-child policy in 1979, and The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong began its "Two is enough!" (兩個就夠哂數!) campaign in the 1970s. Contrasted with the large extended families created during the pre-war and baby-boom years, average modern Chinese families now have many fewer children. 

As of 2006, the fertility rates in Hong Kong and Macau ranked among the lowest two in the world. Hong Kong, ranked the lowest in the world, was the only territory with less than one child born per woman on the average. Both Mainland China and Taiwan were ranked well below the world average. Similarly, the birth rates in Hong Kong and Macau ranked among the lowest three in the world. Both Mainland China and Taiwan were ranked below the median. 

A product of rising divorce rates in Chinese societies is the breakdown of the traditionally close-knit kinship relation. On the other hand, re-marriage could provide more than two sets of paternal or maternal relatives.

The "nine grades of relations" (九族) is an important concept when it comes to application of laws and observing rituals. Since the Han Dynasty, there have been two separate interpretations of what is defined by the nine grades. Each interpretation is based on societal and political needs as the ruler of the day see fit. 

The "older" interpretation ("古文說") defined the nine grades of relations strictly in the paternal line. That is, nine generations from great-great-grandfather down to great-great-grandchildren. This interpretation was officially recognised after Tang and Song dynasties. By Ming and Qing dynasties, laws have defined the patrilineality of the nine kindreds. This interpretation was cited in Part III Chapter 2 of Lewis Henry Morgan's 1877 book Ancient Societies. 

The "contemporary" interpretation ("今文說") defines the nine grades of relations to be four generations from the paternal line, three from the maternal line, and two from the wife's. Historically, this definition has been used during award, punishment and family annihilation. 

Yet another interpretation suggests that "nine" is actually an arbitrary number as nine is considered a large number in Chinese culture. As such, it means anyone and everyone related is to be executed in the context of family annihilation.

The five degrees of mourning attire (五服) define not only the proper attire, but also the proper mourning ritual one should observe when a relative has died. Appearing in writings as early as the Rites of Zhou, mourning rituals developed over the years. By the time of the Qing dynasty, it was set down in law that there were five degrees, or grades of mourning according to the relationship one has with the deceased. The closer a person is related to the deceased, the higher the degree of mourning that is observed. A married female belongs to her husband's clan and observes a similar but lower degree of mourning than her husband. She would observe mourning for a small portion of the members from her own clan. A married man would observe mourning for an even smaller number of relatives of his in-laws. 

In a concubinage situation, a concubine was only required to mourn for her husband, his wife, his parents, and all his children including her own, whereas a wife was required to mourn for almost all of her husband's near relatives. In addition, there was no requirement to mourn the death of a concubine except by the man's children. 

Since the end of feudal China, the rituals of the five degrees of mourning have largely given way to simpler and less elaborate observance. 

Conventionally, clans adopted the five degrees of mourning according to unwritten definitions that determines the difference between close and distant relatives. As such, marriage between relatives that were covered within the five degrees of mourning was considered taboo and immoral. These definitions, unlike the mourning ritual, are still applicable in determining whether a marriage is acceptable, albeit fewer people are familiar with the mourning rituals themselves. 

According to these definitions, many relatives considered "distant" in Western cultures are considered close in Chinese culture. 

The five degrees of mourning attire in decreasing order of severity are: . 

1. 斬榱 - 3 years
2. 齊榱 - 3 years, 1 year, 1 year with staff of mourning, 5 months, 3 months
3. 大功 - 9 months, 7 months
4. 小功 - 5 months
5. 緦麻 - 3 months .

This section covers members and their spouses in the immediate and extended family that is commonly found in the first nine corner cells on the table of consanguinity or cousin chart (from ego to grandparents on the rows and columns). The terms are listed in Standard Chinese, regional and dialectal usages are listed in the corresponding row. The degrees of mourning attire are included as an indication of how close the relation is to ego and what level of respect is expected. "1" being the highest; "5" being the lowest. "0" means they are not within the definition of the five degrees of mourning. Some of these are common relations and are included for completeness. The degrees of mourning indicated in the table are based on ego as an unmarried member of the family.

外 (wài) - prefix to indicate maternal lineage on some of the relations
堂 (táng) - cousins that shares the same surname as ego
表 (biǎo) - cousins that do not share the same surname as ego
高 (gāo) - prefix for relations four generations removed senior of ego, i.e.: great-great-grandparents (高祖父母)
曾 (zēng) - prefix for relations three generations removed, i.e.: great-grandparents; great-grandchildren (曾祖父母; 曾孫)
祖 (zǔ) - prefix for relations two generations removed senior of ego, i.e.: grandparents (祖父母), also a general prefix for relations two or more generations senior of ego. 
孫 (SC: 孙) (sūn) - prefix for relations two generations removed junior of ego, i.e.: grandchildren (孫), also a general prefix for relations two or more generations junior of ego. 
玄/元 (xuán/yuán) - prefix for relations four generations removed junior of ego, i.e.: great-great-grandchildren (玄孫/元孫) . 

Where they differ, the Simplified Chinese character is presented first, followed by the Traditional Chinese character in parentheses.

Primary Members
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning duration
. |- father 父, 父亲(父親)fù, fùqīn 爸爸 bàba老豆 lǎodòu father 1 (3 years)
. |- mother 母, 母亲(母親)mǔ, mǔqīn 妈妈 (媽媽) māmā阿妈 (阿媽) āmā妈咪 (媽咪) māmī老母 lǎomǔ mother 1 (3 years)
. |- older brother 兄xiōng 哥哥 gēge阿哥 āgē大佬 dàlǎo brother 2 (1 year)
. |- younger brother 弟dì 弟弟 dìdi细佬 (細佬) xìlǎo brother 2 (1 year)
. |- older sister 姊zǐ 姊姊 zǐzi姐姐 jiějie家姐 jiājiě sister 45 if married
. |- younger sister 妹mèi 妹妹 mèimèi阿妹 āmèi sister 45 if married
. |- wife 妻子qīzǐ 老婆 lǎopó wife 2* (1 year)2 (1 year) if in-law parents are not deceased
. |- husband 丈夫zhàngfu 老公 lǎogōng husband 1 (3 years)
. |- son 儿子 (兒子)érzi 仔 zǎi son 2 (1 year)
. |- daughter 女儿 (女兒)nǚ'ér 女女 nǚnǚ daughter 2 (1 year) .

Paternal lineage
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- father's father 祖父zǔfù 爷爷 (爺爺) yéye (paternal) grandfather 2
. |- father's mother 祖母zǔmǔ 奶奶 nǎinai嫲嫲 (paternal) grandmother 2
. |- father's older brother 伯父bófù 伯伯 bóbo uncle 2 (1 year)
. |- father's older brother's wife 伯母 bómǔ 伯娘 bóniáng aunt 2 (1 year)
. |- father's younger brother 叔父shūfù 叔叔 shūshu uncle 2 (1 year)
. |- father's younger brother's wife 婶母 (嬸母)shěnmǔ 婶婶 (嬸嬸)shěnshen aunt 2 (1 year)
. |- father's older sister 姑母gūmǔ 姑妈(姑媽) gūmā 姑姑 gūgu 阿姑 āgū aunt 2 (1 year)3 -if married
. |- father's older sister's husband 姑父 gūfu 姑丈 gūzhàng 姑夫 gūfu uncle 0
. |- father's younger sister 姑姐 gūjiě 姑姑 gūgu 阿姑 āgū 姑姐 gūjiě aunt 2 (1 year)3 -if married
. |- father's younger sister's husband 姑丈 gūzhàng uncle 0
. |- father's brother's son, older than ego 堂兄 tángxiōng first cousin 3
. |- father's brother's son, younger than ego 堂弟 tángdì first cousin 3
. |- father's brother's son's wife 堂嫂 tángsǎo first cousin-in-law 5
. |- father's brother's daughter, older than ego 堂姊 tángzǐ 堂姊tángzǐ 堂姐 tángjiě first cousin 34 -if married
. |- father's brother's daughter, younger than ego 堂妹tángmèi 堂妹tángmèi first cousin 34 -if married 
. |- father's sister's son, older than ego 表兄biǎoxiōng 姑表兄 gūbiǎoxiōng 表哥 biǎogē first cousin 5
. |- father's sister's son, younger than ego 表弟biǎodì 姑表弟 gūbiǎodì first cousin 5
. |- father's sister's son's husband 表嫂 biǎsǎo 姑表嫂 gūbiǎosǎo first cousin-in-law 5
. |- father's sister's daughter, older than ego 表姊biǎozǐ 姑表姊 gūbiǎozǐ表姐 biǎojiě first cousin 0
. |- father's sister daughter, younger than ego 表妹biǎomèi 姑表妹 gūbiǎomèi first cousin 0 . 

Maternal lineage
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- mother's father 外祖父 外公; 公公; 姥爺 (maternal) grandfather 4
. |- mother's mother 外祖母 外婆; 婆婆; 姥姥 (maternal) grandmother 4
. |- mother's brother 舅父 舅舅 uncle 4
. |- mother's brother's wife 舅母 妗母 aunt 0
. |- mother's sister 姨母 姨媽 (older than ego's mother); 阿姨 (younger than ego's mother) aunt 4
. |- mother's sister's husband 姨父 姨丈 uncle 0
. |- mother's sibling's son, older than ego 表兄 表哥 first cousin 5
. |- mother's sibling's son, younger than ego 表弟 表弟 first cousin 5
. |- mother's sibling's daughter, older than ego 表姊 表姐 first cousin 0
. |- mother's sibling's daughter, younger than ego 表妹 表妹 first cousin 0 . 

Nephews and nieces
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- brother's son 姪兒 姪仔 nephew 2 (1 year)
. |- brother's son's wife 姪媳婦 niece-in-law 3
. |- brother's daughter 姪女 niece 2 (1 year)3 -if married
. |- brother's daughter's husband 姪女婿 nephew-in-law 0
. |- sister's son 外甥 姨甥 (if ego is male) nephew 0
. |- sister's daughter 外甥女 姨甥女 (if ego is female) niece 0 . 

Grandchildren
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- son's son 孫兒 孫仔 grandson 2 (1 year) -heir-apparent3 -all others
. |- son's daughter 孫女 granddaughter 2 (1 year)
. |- daughter's son 外孫兒 外孫仔 grandson 5
. |- daughter's daughter 外孫女 granddaughter 0 . 

In-laws
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- older brother's wife 嫂 sister-in-law 4
. |- younger brother's wife 弟婦 sister-in-law 4
. |- older sister's husband 姊夫 姐夫 brother-in-law 0
. |- younger sister's husband 妹夫 brother-in-law 0
. |- son's wife 兒媳 媳婦 daughter-in-law 2 (1 year) -wife of heir-apparent)3 -all others)
. |- daughter's husband 女婿 son-in-law 0
. |- son's son's wife 孫媳婦 granddaughter-in-law 2 (1 year) -wife of heir-apparent5 -all others
. |- son's daughter's husband 孫女婿 grandson-in-law 0
. |- daughter's son's wife 外孫媳婦 granddaughter-in-law 0
. |- daughter's daughter's husband 外孫女婿 grandson-in-law 0
. |- wife's father 岳父 岳丈; 外父 father-in-law 5
. |- wife's mother 岳母 丈母; 外母 mother-in-law 5
. |- husband's father 公公 家公; 老爺 father-in-law 1 (3 years)
. |- husband's mother 婆婆 家姑; 家婆; 奶奶 mother-in-law 1 (3 years)
. |- wife's older brother 内兄 大舅 brother-in-law 0
. |- wife's younger brother 内弟 小舅 brother-in-law 0
. |- wife's older sister 姨姐 大姨 sister-in-law 0
. |- wife's younger sister 姨妹 小姨 sister-in-law 0
. |- husband's older brother 大伯 brother-in-law 3
. |- husband's older brother's wife 大嫂 sister-in-law 4
. |- husband's younger brother 小叔 brother-in-law 4
. |- husband's younger brother's wife 小嬸 sister-in-law 4
. |- husband's older sister 大姑 sister-in-law 4
. |- husband's younger sister 小姑 sister-in-law 4
. |- wife's sister's husband, older than ego 襟兄 (elder) (co-)brother-in-law 0
. |- wife's sister's husband, younger than ego 襟弟 (younger) (co-)brother-in-law 0
. |- husband's brother's wife 妯娌 (co-)sister-in-law 
. |- son's or daughter's father-in-law 亲家公 亲家翁 co-father-in-law (rare) 
. |- son's or daughter's mother-in-law 亲家母 亲家婆 co-mother-in-law (rare) 
. |- husband's wife, senior to ego ?媵 co-wife 
. |- husband's wife, junior to ego ?媵 co-wife
. |- husband's wife, younger sister to ego 娣媵 sister-wife 
. |- concubine 妾 concubine .

This section covers members and their spouses found beyond the first nine corner cells on the table of consanguinity or cousin chart. Although some of the relations seem distant, they are considered close relatives and it is common for Chinese families to have regular contact with these members. 

Extended family
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- paternal (maternal) grandfather's older (younger) brother (外)伯(叔)祖父 (外)伯(叔)公 granduncle paternal: 4 maternal: 0
. |- - wife (外)伯(嬸)祖母 (外)伯(嬸)婆 grandaunt paternal: 4 maternal: 0
. |- paternal (maternal) grandfather's sister (外)姑祖母 (外)姑婆; (外)從祖姑 grandaunt paternal: 4; 5 if married maternal: 0
. |- - husband (外)姑祖父 (外)姑公; (外)丈公 granduncle 0
. |- paternal (maternal) grandmother's brother (外)舅祖父 (外)舅公 granduncle 0
. |- - wife (外)舅祖母 (外)舅婆 grandaunt 0
. |- paternal (maternal) grandmother's sister (外)姨祖母 (外)姨婆 grandaunt 0
. |- - husband (外)姨祖父 (外)姨公 granduncle 0
. |- paternal (maternal) great-grandparent (外)曾祖父母 (外)太公/婆 great-grandparent paternal: 2 (5 months) maternal: 0
. |- paternal (maternal) great-grandfather's older (younger) brother (外)族曾祖父 (外)曾伯(叔)祖父;(外)太伯(叔)公 great-granduncle paternal: 5 maternal: 0
. |- - wife (外)族曾祖母 (外)太伯(嬸)婆; (外)太伯(嬸)婆 great-grandaunt paternal: 5 maternal: 0
. |- paternal (maternal) great-grandfather's sister (外)族曾祖姑 (外)曾祖姑 great-grandaunt paternal: 5; 0 if married maternal: 0
. |- paternal (maternal) great-great-grandparent (外)高祖父母 great-great-grandparent paternal: 2 (3 months) maternal: 0
. |- son of brother's son (daughter) (外)姪孫兒 grandnephew 2 (1 year)maternal: 0
. |- - wife (外)姪孫媳 grandniece in-law 5maternal:0
. |- daughter of brother's son (daughter) (外)姪孫女 grandniece 2 (1 year); 3 if marriedmaternal: 0
. |- sister's grandchildren 外甥孫兒女 grandnephew; grandniece 0
. |- children of son's son 曾孫兒女 great-grandchildren male: 5; female:0
. |- all other great-grandchildren 外曾孫兒女 great-grandchildren 0
. |- children of son's son's son 玄孫兒女 元孫兒女 great-great-grandchildren male: 5; female:0
. |- all other great-great-grandchildren 外玄孫兒女 外元孫兒女 great-great-grandchildren 0
. |- grandson of brother's son (daughter) (外)姪曾孫兒 great-grandnephew 5; maternal: 0
. |- granddaughter of brother's son (daughter) (外)姪曾孫女 great-grandniece 5; maternal: 0
. |- sister's great-grandchildren 外甥曾孫兒女 great-grandnephew; great-grandniece 0 . 

First cousins
. |- Relation Term English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- children of father's brother's son 堂姪兒女 first cousin once removed 
. |- all other grandchildren of father's sibling 表姪兒女 " 
. |- grandchildren of mother's sibling 表甥兒女 " 
. |- son of paternal grandfather's brother who is older than ego's father 堂伯 " 
. |- son of paternal grandfather's brother who is younger than ego's father 堂叔 " 
. |- daughter of paternal grandfather's brother 堂姑 " 
. |- son of maternal grandfather's brother 堂舅 " 
. |- daughter of maternal grandfather's brother 堂姨 " 
. |- son of paternal grandfather's sister who is older than ego's father 表伯 " 
. |- son of paternal grandmother's sibling who is older than ego's father 表伯 " 
. |- son of paternal grandfather's sister who is younger than ego's father 表叔 " 
. |- son of paternal grandmother's sibling who is younger than ego's father 表叔 " 
. |- daughter of paternal grandfather's sister 表姑 " 
. |- daughter of paternal grandmother's sibling 表姑 " 
. |- son of maternal grandfather's sister 表舅 " 
. |- son of maternal grandmother's sibling 表舅 " 
. |- daughter of maternal grandfather's sister 表姨 " 
. |- daughter of maternal grandmother's sibling 表姨 " 
. |- son of paternal (maternal) great-grandfather's brother who is older than ego's grandfather (外)族伯祖父 first cousin twice removed 
. |- son of paternal (maternal) great-grandfather's brother who is younger than ego's grandfather (外)族叔祖父 " 
. |- daughter of paternal great-grandfather's brother (外)族祖姑 " 
. |- children of father's brother's son's son 堂姪孫兒女 
. |- all other great-grandchildren of parent's sibling 表姪孫兒女 " . 

Second cousins
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- grandson of paternal grandfather's brother older than ego 再從兄 second cousin 4
. |- grandson of paternal grandfather's brother younger than ego 再從弟 " 4
. |- granddaughter of paternal grandfather's brother older than ego 再從姐 " 4; 5 if married
. |- granddaughter of paternal grandfather's brother younger than ego 再從妹 " 4; 5 if married
. |- second cousin once removed 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " 
. |- " . 

Third cousins
. |- Relation Term Vocative or Address English equivalent Degree of mourning (duration)
. |- great-grandson of paternal great-grandfather's brother older than ego 族兄 三從兄 third cousin 5
. |- great-grandson of paternal great-grandfather's brother younger than ego 族弟 三從弟 " 5
. |- great-granddaughter of paternal great-grandfather's brother older than ego 族姐 三從姐 " 5; 0 if married
. |- great-granddaughter of paternal great-grandfather's brother younger than ego 族妹 三從妹 " 5; 0 if married .

Other than some of the relations mentioned in the previous sections that are not covered under the five degrees of mourning attire, the following are kin that are also considered distant. 

(外)來孫 - great-great-great-grandchildren
(外)昆孫 - great-great-great-great-grandchildren
(外)雲孫 - great-great-great-great-great-grandchildren
外 - prefix for maternal line relations; essentially anyone not sharing the same surname as ego .

The following familial relationship suggests partial or no consanguinity. Most of them are not a modern phenomenon, however. In fact, polygamy (specifically polygyny) was widely accepted in pre-republican China. 

The saying of "three fathers and eight mothers" (三父八母) refers to:

Cohabiting stepfather (同居的繼父)
Non-cohabiting stepfather (不同居的繼父)
Stepfather from re-marriage of father and mother (從父母嫁之繼父)
嫡母 - father's official wife (when birth mother of ego is a concubine)
繼母 - stepmother
養母 - adopted mother
慈母 - concubine replacing ego's birth mother who died
嫁母 - widowed birth mother who has remarried
出母 - birth mother who has been divorced
庶母 - father's concubine who is also a mother (when birth mother of ego is the official wife)
乳母 - wet nurse
Another saying of "five fathers and ten mothers" (五父十母) refers to

生父 - birth father
養父 - adopted father
繼父 - stepfather
義父 - godfather
師父 - (male) teacher/coach/master
and two mothers added to the eight mentioned above:

生母 - birth mother
諸母 - father's concubine . 

As a result of polygamy there would be half-siblings:

同父異母兄弟姐妹 - siblings sharing the same father
同母異父兄弟姐妹 - siblings sharing the same mother .

Morgan, Lewis Henry. 1877. [REF]. MacMillan &#38; Company, London (complete text online)
Wolf, Arthur P. and Chieh-shan Huang. 1985. Marriage and Adoption in China, 1845-1945. Stanford University Press. 
 [REF] tables .. 

Compulsory sterilization (or sterilisation), also known as forced sterilization (or sterilisation), programs are government policies which attempt to force people to undergo surgical sterilization. In the first half of the 20th century, several such programs were instituted in countries around the world, usually as part of eugenics programs intended to prevent the reproduction and multiplication of members of the population considered to be carriers of defective genetic traits. Forced sterilization has been recognized as a crime against humanity if the action is part of a widespread or systematic practice by the Rome Statute Explanatory Memorandum, which defines the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court [REF]. 

In countries providing for a procedure to legally recognize sex change, surgical sterilization usually is a pre-condition for such recognition. This, however, is not compulsory sterilization, given that the decision to apply for such sex-change is voluntary.

Two Canadian provinces (Alberta and British Columbia) performed compulsory sterilization programs with eugenic aims. Canadian compulsory sterilization operated via the same overall mechanisms of institutionalization, judgement, and surgery as the American system. One notable difference is in the treatment of non-insane criminals. Canadian legislation never allowed for punitive sterilization of inmates.

Czechoslovakia carried out a policy of sterilization of some Roma women, starting in 1973. In various cases the sterilization was agreed upon, often in exchange for social welfare benefits or was given by the lack of education [REF]. The dissidents of the Charter 77 denounced it in 1977–78 as a "genocide", but the practice continued through the Velvet Revolution of 1989 [REF]. A 2005 report by the Czech government's independent ombudsman, Otakar Motejl, identified dozens of cases of coercive sterilization between 1979 and 2001, and called for criminal investigations and possible prosecution against several health care workers and administrators [REF].

One of the first acts by Adolf Hitler after achieving total control over the German state was to pass the Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring (Gesetz zur Verhütung erbkranken Nachwuchses) in July 1933. The law was signed in by Hitler himself, and over 200 eugenic courts were created specifically as a result of the law. Under the German law, all doctors in the Reich were required to report patients of theirs who were mentally retarded, mentally ill (including schizophrenia and manic depression), epileptic, blind, deaf, or physically deformed, and a steep monetary penalty was imposed for any patients who were not properly reported. Individuals suffering from alcoholism or Huntington's Disease could also be sterilized. The individual's case was then presented in front of a court of Nazi officials and public health officers who would review their medical records, take testimony from friends and colleagues, and eventually decide whether or not to order a sterilization operation performed on the individual, using force if necessary. Though not explicitly covered by the law, 400 mixed-race "Rhineland Bastards" were also sterilized beginning in 1937 [REF]. 

By the end of World War II, over 400,000 individuals were sterilized under the German law and its revisions, most within its first four years of being enacted. When the issue of compulsory sterilization was brought up at the Nuremberg trials after the war, many Nazis defended their actions on the matter by indicating that it was the United States itself from whom they had taken inspiration. The Nazis had many other eugenics-inspired racial policies, including their "euthanasia" program in which around 70,000 people institutionalized or suffering from birth defects were killed [REF].

In the first part of the Showa era, Japanese governments promoted increasing the number of healthy Japanese, while simultaneously decreasing the number of people suffering mental retardation, disability, genetic disease and other conditions that led to inferiority in the Japanese gene pool [REF]. 

The Leprosy Prevention laws of 1907, 1931 and 1953, permitted the segregation of patients in sanitariums where forced abortions and sterilization were common and authorized punishment of patients "disturbing peace" [REF]. Under the colonial Korean Leprosy prevention ordinance, Korean patients were also subjected to hard labor [REF]. 

The Race Eugenic Protection Law was submitted from 1934 to 1938 to the Diet. After four amendments, this draft was promulgated as a National Eugenic Law in 1940 by the Konoe government [REF]. According to Matsubara Yoko, from 1940 to 1945, sterilization was done to 454 Japanese persons under this law [REF]. 

According to the Eugenic Protection Law (1948), sterilization could be enforced on criminals "with genetic predisposition to commit crime", patients with genetic diseases such as total color-blindness, hemophilia, albinism and ichthyosis, and mental affections such as schizophrenia, manic-depression and epilepsy [REF]. The mental sicknesses were added in 1952.

India's state of emergency between 1975 and 1977 included an infamous family planning initiative beginning April 1976, which involved the vasectomy of thousands of men and tubal ligation of women, either for payment or under coercive conditions. Son of then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, Sanjay Gandhi was largely blamed for what turned out to be a failed program [REF]. A strong backlash against any initiative associated with family planning followed the highly controversial program, which continues into the 21st century [REF].

Coercive sterilization to enforce the one child policy has occurred in China. This is not permitted by the law, and some local officials have been jailed for their actions [REF]. In 2010, Amnesty International accused authorities in Puning of compelling people to be sterilized by imprisoning their elderly relatives [REF].
See also Iron Fist Campaign .

In Peru, President Alberto Fujimori (in office from 1990–2000) has been accused of genocide and crimes against humanity as a result of a sterilization program put in place by his administration [REF]. Peru put in place a program of forced sterilizations against indigenous people (essentially the Quechuas and the Aymaras), in the name of a "public health plan", presented July 28, 1995. The plan was principally financed using funds from USAID (36 million dollars), the Nippon Foundation, and later, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) [REF]. On September 9, 1995, Fujimori presented a Bill that would revise the "General Law of Population", in order to allow sterilization. Several contraceptive methods were also legalized, all measures that were strongly opposed by the Roman Catholic Church, as well as the Catholic organization Opus Dei. In February 1996, the World Health Organization (WHO) itself congratulated Fujimori for his plan to control demographic growth [REF]. 

On February 25, 1998, a representative for USAID testified before the U.S. government's House International Relations Committee, to address controversy surrounding Peru's program. He indicated that the government of Peru was making important changes to the program, in order to: . 

Discontinue their campaigns in tubal ligations and vasectomies. 
Make clear to health workers that there are no provider targets for voluntary surgical contraception or any other method of contraception. 
Implement a comprehensive monitoring program to ensure compliance with family planning norms and informed consent procedures. 
Welcome Ombudsman Office investigations of complaints received and respond to any additional complaints that are submitted as a result of the public request for any additional concerns. 
Implement a 72 hour "waiting period" for people who choose tubal ligation or vasectomy. This waiting period will occur between the second counseling session and surgery. 
Require health facilities to be certified as appropriate for performing surgical contraception as a means to ensure that no operations are done in makeshift or substandard facilities [REF]. 

In September 2001, Minister of Health Luis Solari launched a special commission into the activities of the Voluntary Surgical Contraception, initiating a Parliamentary commission tasked with enquiring into the "irregularities" of the program, and to put it on an acceptable footing. In July 2002, its Final Report ordered by the Minister of Health revealed that between 1995 and 2000, 331,600 women were sterilized, while 25,590 men submitted to vasectomies [REF]. The plan, which had the objective of diminishing the number of births in areas of poverty within Peru, was essentially directed at the indigenous people living in deprived areas (areas often involved in internal conflicts with the Peruvian government, as with the Shining Path guerilla group). Deputy Dora Núñez Dávila made the accusation in September 2003 that 400,000 indigenous people were sterilized during the 1990s. Documents proved that President Fujimori was informed, each month, of the number of sterilizations done, by his former Ministers of Health, Eduardo Yong Motta (1994–96), Marino Costa Bauer (1996–1999) and Alejandro Aguinaga (1999–2000) [REF]. A study by sociologist Giulia Tamayo, Nada Personal (in English: Nothing Personal), showed that doctors were required to meet quotas. According to Le Monde diplomatique, "tubal ligation festivals" were organized through program publicity campaigns, held in the pueblos jóvenes (in English: shantytowns). In 1996 there were, according to official statistics, 81,762 tubal ligations performed on women, with a peak being reached the following year, with 109,689 ligatures, then only 25,995 in 1998 [REF]. 

On October 21, 2011, Peru’s Attorney General José Bardales decided to reopen an investigation into the cases, which had been halted in 2009 under the statute of limitations, after the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that Peru’s sterilization program involved crimes against humanity, which are not time-limited [REF].

In 1997, following the publication of articles by Maciej Zaremba in the Dagens Nyheter daily, widespread attention was given to the fact that Sweden once operated a strong sterilization program, which was active primarily from the mid 1930s until the 1970s. A governmental commission was set up, and finished its inquiry in 2000 [REF]. 

The eugenistic legislation was enacted in 1934 and was formally abolished in 1976. According to the 2000 governmental report, 21,000 were estimated to have been forcibly sterilized, 6,000 were coerced into a 'voluntary' sterilization while the nature of a further 4,000 cases could not be determined [REF]. However, the 40,000 or so socio-medical cases are contested, and Zaremba and others argue that they were more in the interest of society than individual women. The Swedish state subsequently paid out damages to victims who contacted the authorities and asked for compensation. 

The program included all known criteria for sterilization, including a loosely phrased "social" indiciation. In 1922 the State Institute of Racial Biology was founded in Uppsala and in 1927 Parliament began to deal with the first legal provisions on sterilisation [REF]. A new draft was produced in 1932, already taking into account sterilisation for general socio-prophylactic reasons, and even without the consent of the person concerned [REF]. The draft was adopted in 1934 [REF]. Another law, passed in 1941, was more far reaching, included a social indication and did not include any age of consent limit. 

From 1950, the number of eugenic sterilisations under the 1941 legal provisions gradually decreased [REF].
It is possible but not proven that the Swedish sterilizations targeted travellers. These were sometimes viewed as a separate race or ethnic group. The Swedish Racial Hygiene Society had been founded in Stockholm in 1909, and the 1934 works by Alva and Gunnar Myrdal was very significant in promoting the eugenic tendencies in practical politics [REF]. The authors theorized that the best solution for the Swedish welfare state ("folkhem") was to prevent at the outset the hereditary transfer of undesirable characteristics that caused the individual affected to become sooner or later a burden on society. The authors therefore proposed a "corrective social reform” under which sterilisation was to prevent "unviable individuals” from spreading their undesirable traits [REF]. 

In Sweden, sterilization is only compulsory before sex change [REF]. This last compulsory sterilization has been criticized by several political parties in Sweden. The Christian Democrats is the only party in the Parliament of Sweden that is in favor of keeping compulsory sterilization.

In October 1999, Margrith von Felten suggested to the National Council of Switzerland in the form of a general proposal to adopt legal regulations that would enable reparation for persons sterilised against their will. According to the proposal, reparation was to be provided to persons who had undergone the intervention without their consent or who had consented to sterilisation under coercion. According to Margrith von Felten:
 . 

Switzerland refused, however, to vote a reparations Act.

The United States was the first country to concertedly undertake compulsory sterilization programs for the purpose of eugenics [REF]. The heads of the program were avid believers in eugenics and frequently argued for their program. It was shut down due to ethical problems. The principal targets of the American program were the mentally retarded and the mentally ill, but also targeted under many state laws were the deaf, the blind, people with epilepsy, and the physically deformed. According to the activist Angela Davis, Native Americans, as well as African-American women[REF] were sterilized against their will in many states, often without their knowledge while they were in a hospital for other reasons (e.g. childbirth). Some sterilizations took place in prisons and other penal institutions, targeting criminality, but they were in the relative minority. In the end, over 65,000 individuals were sterilized in 33 states under state compulsory sterilization programs in the United States [REF].][REF] . 

The first state to introduce a compulsory sterilization bill was Michigan, in 1897 but the proposed law failed to garner enough votes by legislators to be adopted. Eight years later Pennsylvania's state legislators passed a sterilization bill that was vetoed by the governor. Indiana became the first state to enact sterilization legislation in 1907,[REF] followed closely by Washington and California in 1909. Sterilization rates across the country were relatively low (California being the sole exception) until the 1927 Supreme Court case Buck v. Bell which legitimized the forced sterilization of patients at a Virginia home for the mentally retarded. The number of sterilizations performed per year increased until another Supreme Court case, Skinner v. Oklahoma, 1942, complicated the legal situation by ruling against sterilization of criminals if the equal protection clause of the constitution was violated. That is, if sterilization was to be performed, then it could not exempt white-collar criminals [REF]. 

Most sterilization laws could be divided into three main categories of motivations: eugenic (concerned with heredity), therapeutic (part of an even-then obscure medical theory that sterilization would lead to vitality), or punitive (as a punishment for criminals), though of course these motivations could be combined in practice and theory (sterilization of criminals could be both punitive and eugenic, for example). Buck v. Bell asserted only that eugenic sterilization was constitutional, whereas Skinner v. Oklahoma ruled specifically against punitive sterilization. Most operations only worked to prevent reproduction (such as severing the vas deferens in males), though some states (Oregon and North Dakota in particular) had laws which called for the use of castration. In general, most sterilizations were performed under eugenic statutes, in state-run psychiatric hospitals and homes for the mentally disabled [REF]. There was never a federal sterilization statute, though eugenicist Harry H. Laughlin, whose state-level "Model Eugenical Sterilization Law" was the basis of the statute affirmed in Buck v. Bell, proposed the structure of one in 1922 [REF]. 

After World War II, public opinion towards eugenics and sterilization programs became more negative in the light of the connection with the genocidal policies of Nazi Germany, though a significant number of sterilizations continued in a few states until the early 1960s. The Oregon Board of Eugenics, later renamed the Board of Social Protection, existed until 1983,[REF] with the last forcible sterilization occurring in 1981 [REF]. The U.S. commonwealth Puerto Rico had a sterilization program as well. Some states continued to have sterilization laws on the books for much longer after that, though they were rarely if ever used. California sterilized more than any other state by a wide margin, and was responsible for over a third of all sterilization operations. Information about the California sterilization program was produced into book form and widely disseminated by eugenicists E.S. Gosney and Paul B. Popenoe, which was said by the government of Adolf Hitler to be of key importance in proving that large-scale compulsory sterilization programs were feasible [REF].
In recent years, the governors of many states have made public apologies for their past programs beginning with Virginia and followed by Oregon[REF] and California. None have offered to compensate those sterilized, however, citing that few are likely still living (and would of course have no affected offspring) and that inadequate records remain by which to verify them. At least one compensation case, Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital (1981), was filed in the courts on the grounds that the sterilization law was unconstitutional. It was rejected because the law was no longer in effect at the time of the filing. However, the petitioners were granted some compensation as the stipulations of the law itself, which required informing the patients about their operations, had not been carried out in many cases. 

The 27 states where sterilization laws remained on the books (though not all were still in use) in 1956 were: Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia, Wisconsin [REF].

The United States, the Puerto Rican government, and the medical community began a program for the mass sterilization of women in Puerto Rico. By 1965, one-third of the female population had been sterilized and Puerto Rican women continued to use female sterilization as a form of birth control due to a lack of knowledge of the irreversible effects [REF]. Sterilization was so common that Puerto Rican women labeled it "la operacion", or the operation [REF]. The government continued with their plan as stated in a report dated November 1973. The report, entitled "Opportunities for Education, Employment, and Training", was written by an economic policy group backed by the governor of Puerto Rico. This report explains alternatives for decreasing the Puerto Rican working class and a high unemployment rate was noted in the report as Puerto Rico's main problem [REF]. 

The Puerto Rican government and population was suffering from economic problems, high unemployment rate, and poverty during the 1920's. The United States blamed overpopulation for these problems. 
[REF] Contraception was illegal in the Puerto Rican colony which was largely due to the main religion of Puerto Rico: Catholocism. The Catholic Church teachings state that contraception and sterilization are sins against nature. Therefore, any form of contraception was illegal in Puerto Rico before the late 1930's [REF]. In 1937, the United States made contraceptives legal, initiating their plan for population control [REF]. A private organization opened twenty-three birth control clinics in 1937 and a bill was signed eliminating the laws making the advertisement of contraceptives and pregnancy prevention services a felony. Another 160 private and public birth control clinics were opened after another bill was signed authorizing the "Commissioner of Health in Puerto Rico to regulate the teaching and dissemination of eugenic principles, including contraception, to health centers and maternal hospitals" [REF]. Soon after, the United States government passed Law #136 which made sterilization legal for other than strictly medical reasons and advocated picking out the "unfit" [REF].

Eugenics programs including forced sterilization existed in most Northern European countries, as well as other more or less Protestant countries. Some programs, such as Canada's and Sweden's, lasted well into the 1970s. Other countries that had notably active sterilization programs include Denmark, Norway, Finland, Estonia, Switzerland, Iceland, and some countries in Latin America (including Panama) [REF]. In the United Kingdom, Home Secretary Winston Churchill introduced a bill that included forced sterilization. Writer G. K. Chesterton led a successful effort to defeat that clause of the 1913 Mental Deficiency Act. 

According to some testimonies, the Soviet Union allegedly imposed forced sterilization on female workers deported from Romania to Soviet labor camps. This is said to have occurred after World War II, when Romania was supposed to supply a reconstruction workforce (according to the armistice convention) [REF]. However, no court decisions or formal investigations of these allegations are known for the moment.. 

Reproductive rights are legal rights and freedoms relating to reproduction and reproductive health [REF]. The World Health Organization defines reproductive rights as follows:
Reproductive rights rest on the recognition of the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health. They also include the right of all to make decisions concerning reproduction free of discrimination, coercion and violence [REF].

Reproductive rights may include some or all of the following: the right to legal or safe abortion, the right to birth control, the right to access quality reproductive healthcare, and the right to education and access in order to make free and informed reproductive choices [REF]. Reproductive rights may also include the right to receive education about contraception and sexually transmitted infections, and freedom from coerced sterilization, abortion, and contraception, and protection from gender-based practices such as female genital mutilation (FGM) and male genital mutilation (MGM) [REF]. 

Reproductive rights began to develop as a subset of human rights at the United Nation's 1968 International Conference on Human Rights [REF]. The resulting non binding Proclamation of Teheran was the first international document to recognize one of these rights when it stated that: "Parents have a basic human right to determine freely and responsibly the number and the spacing of their children."[REF][REF] States, though, have been slow in incorporating these rights in internationally legally binding instruments. Thus, while some of these rights have already been recognized in hard law, that is, in legally binding international human rights instruments, others have been mentioned only in non binding recommendations and, therefore, have at best the status of soft law in international law, while a further group is yet to be accepted by the international community and therefore remains at the level of advocacy [REF]. 

According to pro-choice activist Laura Knudsen, issues related to reproductive rights are some of the most vigorously contested rights' issues worldwide, regardless of the population's socioeconomic level, religion or culture [REF].

In 1945, the UN Charter included the obligation "to promote.. universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without discrimination as to race, sex, language, or religion". However, the Charter did not define these rights. Three years later, the UN adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), the first international legal document to delineate human rights; the UDHR does not mention reproductive rights. Reproductive rights began to appear as a subset of human rights in the 1968 Proclamation of Teheran, which states: "Parents have a basic right to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children and a right to adequate education and information in this respect" [REF]. 

This right was affirmed by the UN General Assembly in the 1974 Declaration on Social Progress and Development which states "The family as a basic unit of society and the natural environment for the growth and well-being of all its members, particularly children and youth, should be assisted and protected so that it may fully assume its responsibilities within the community. Parents have the exclusive right to determine freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children."[REF][REF] The 1975 UN International Women's Year Conference echoed the Proclamation of Teheran.

The twenty year "Cairo Programme of Action" was adopted in 1994 at the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) in Cairo. The non binding Programme of Action asserted that governments have a responsibility to meet individuals' reproductive needs, rather than demographic targets. It recommended that Family planning services be provided in the context of other reproductive health services, including services for healthy and safe childbirth, care for sexually transmitted infections, and post-abortion care. The ICPD also addressed issues such as violence against women, sex trafficking, and adolescent health [REF]. The Cairo Program is the first international policy document to define reproductive health,[REF] stating:
Reproductive health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and its functions and processes. Reproductive health therefore implies that people are able to have a satisfying and safe sex life and that they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when and how often to do so. Implicit in this last condition are the right of men and women to be informed [about] and to have access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable methods of family planning of their choice, as well as other methods for regulation of fertility which are not against the law, and the right of access to appropriate health-care services that will enable women to go safely through pregnancy and childbirth and provide couples with the best chance of having a healthy infant [para. 72] [REF]. 

Unlike previous population conferences, a wide range of interests from grassroots to government level were represented in Cairo. 179 nations attended the ICPD and overall eleven thousand representatives from governments, NGOs, international agencies and citizen activists participated [REF]. The ICPD did not address the far-reaching implications of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In 1999, recommendations at the ICPD+5 were expanded to include commitment to AIDS education, research, and prevention of mother-to-child transmission, as well as to the development of vaccines and microbicides [REF]. 

The Cairo Programme of Action was adopted by 184 UN member states. Nevertheless, many Latin American and Islamic States made formal reservations to the programme, in particular, to its concept of reproductive rights and sexual freedom, to its treatment of abortion, and to its potential incompatibility with Islamic Law [REF].

The 1995 Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, in its non-binding Declaration and Platform for Action, supported the Cairo Programme's definition of reproductive health, but established a broader context of reproductive rights:
The human rights of women include their right to have control over and decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free of coercion, discrimination and violence. Equal relationships between women and men in matters of sexual relations and reproduction, including full respect for the integrity of the person, require mutual respect, consent and shared responsibility for sexual behavior and its consequences [para. 96] [REF]. The Beijing Platform demarcated twelve interrelated critical areas of the human rights of women that require advocacy. The Platform framed women's reproductive rights as "indivisible, universal and inalienable human rights."[REF] .

The Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, proposed by a group of experts in November 2006[REF] but not yet incorporated by States in international law,[REF] declares in its Preamble that "the international community has recognized the rights of persons to decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free from coercion, discrimination, and violence." In relation to reproductive health, Principle 9 on "The Right to Treatment with Humanity while in Detention" requires that "States shall.. [p]rovide adequate access to medical care and counseling appropriate to the needs of those in custody, recognizing any particular needs of persons on the basis of their sexual orientation and gender identity, including with regard to reproductive health, access to HIV/AIDS information and therapy and access to hormonal or other therapy as well as to gender-reassignment treatments where desired."[REF] Nonetheless, African, Caribbean and Islamic Countries, as well as the Russian Federation, have objected to the use of these principles as Human Rights standards [REF].

Since most existing legally binding international human rights instruments do not explicitly mention sexual and reproductive rights, a broad coalition of NGOs, civil servants, and experts working in international organizations have been promoting a reinterpretation of those instruments to link the realization of the already internationally recognized human rights with the realization of reproductive rights [REF]. An example of this linkage is provided by the 1994 Cairo Programme of Action: "reproductive rights embrace certain human rights that are already recognized in national laws, international human rights documents and other relevant United Nations consensus documents. These rights rest on the recognition of the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health. It also includes the right of all to make decisions concerning reproduction free of discrimination, coercion and violence as expressed in human rights documents. In the exercise of this right, they should take into account the needs of their living and future children and their responsibilities towards the community."[REF]Similarly, Amnesty International has argued that the realisation of reproductive rights is linked with the realisation of a series of recognised human rights, including the right to health, the right to freedom from discrimination, the right to privacy, and the right not to be subjected to torture or ill-treatment [REF]. However, not all states have accepted the inclusion of reproductive rights in the body of internationally recognized human rights. At the Cairo Conference, several states made formal reservations either to the concept of reproductive rights or to its specific content. Ecuador, for instance, stated that: "With regard to the Programme of Action of the Cairo International Conference on Population and Development and in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Ecuador and the norms of international law, the delegation of Ecuador reaffirms, inter alia, the following principles embodied in its Constitution: the inviolability of life, the protection of children from the moment of conception, freedom of conscience and religion, the protection of the family as the fundamental unit of society, responsible paternity, the right of parents to bring up their children and the formulation of population and development plans by the Government in accordance with the principles of respect for sovereignty. Accordingly, the delegation of Ecuador enters a reservation with respect to all terms such as "regulation of fertility", "interruption of pregnancy", "reproductive health", "reproductive rights" and "unwanted children", which in one way or another, within the context of the Programme of Action, could involve abortion."[REF]Similar reservations were made by Argentina, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras, Malta, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru and the Holy See. Islamic Countries, such as Brunei, Djibouti, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen made broad reservations against any element of the programme that could be interpreted as contrary to the Sharia. Guatemala even questioned whether the conference could legally proclaim new human rights [REF].

The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the World Health Organization (WHO) advocate for reproductive rights with a primary emphasis on women's rights. In this respect the UN and WHO focus on a range of issues from access to family planning services, sex education, menopause, and the reduction of obstetric fistula, to the relationship between reproductive health and economic status. 

The reproductive rights of women are advanced in the context of the right to freedom from discrimination and the social and economic status of women. The group Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN) explained the link in the following statement:
Control over reproduction is a basic need and a basic right for all women. Linked as it is to women's health and social status, as well as the powerful social structures of religion, state control and administrative inertia, and private profit, it is from the perspective of poor women that this right can best be understood and affirmed. Women know that childbearing is a social, not a purely personal, phenomenon; nor do we deny that world population trends are likely to exert considerable pressure on resources and institutions by the end of this century. But our bodies have become a pawn in the struggles among states, religions, male heads of households, and private corporations. Programs that do not take the interests of women into account are unlikely to succeed. [REF]. 

Attempts have been made to analyse the socioeconomic conditions that affect the realisation of a woman's reproductive rights. The term reproductive justice has been used to describe these broader social and economic issues. Proponents of reproductive justice argue that while the right to legalized abortion[REF] and contraception applies to everyone, these choices are only meaningful to those with resources, and that there is a growing gap between access and affordability.[REF] .

Men's reproductive rights have been claimed by various organizations, both for issues of reproductive health, and other rights related to sexual reproduction. 

Three international issues in men's reproductive health are sexually transmitted diseases, cancer and exposure to toxins [REF]. 

Recently men's reproductive right with regards to paternity have become subject of debate in the U.S. The term "male abortion" was coined by Melanie McCulley, a South Carolina attorney, in a 1998 article. The theory begins with the premise that when a woman becomes pregnant she has the option of abortion, adoption, or parenthood; it argues, in the context of legally recognized gender equality, that in the earliest stages of pregnancy the putative (alleged) father should have the right to relinquish all future parental rights and financial responsibility, leaving the informed mother with the same three options [REF]. This concept has been supported by a former president of the feminist organization National Organization for Women, attorney Karen DeCrow[REF] . 

In 2006, the National Center for Men brought a case in the US, Dubay v. Wells (dubbed by some "Roe v. Wade for men"), that argued that in the event of an unplanned pregnancy, when an unmarried woman informs a man that she is pregnant by him, he should have an opportunity to give up all paternity rights and responsibilities. Supporters argue that this would allow the woman time to make an informed decision and give men the same reproductive rights as women [REF]. In its dismissal of the case, the U.S. Court of Appeals (Sixth Circuit) stated that "the Fourteenth Amendment does not deny to [the] State the power to treat different classes of persons in different ways."[REF] .

Implementation of the Cairo Programme of Action varies considerably from country to country. In many countries, post-ICPD tensions emerged as the human rights-based approach was implemented. Since the ICPD, many countries have broadened their reproductive health programs and attempted to integrate maternal and child health services with family planning. More attention is paid to adolescent health and the consequences of unsafe abortion. Lara Knudsen observes that the ICPD succeeded in getting feminist language into governments' and population agencies' literature, but in many countries the underlying concepts are not widely put into practice [REF]. In two preparatory meetings for the ICPD+10 in Asia and Latin America, the United States, under the George W. Bush Administration, was the only nation opposing the ICPD's Programme of Action [REF].

Laura Knudsen, a pro-choice activist, has suggested that "twenty percent of all pregnancies worldwide end in abortion, and nearly half of those abortions are unsafe and often illegal."[REF] According to the WHO, more than 45 million (legal and illegal) abortions take place annually. At the same time, approximately 66,500 women die from the complications of unsafe abortion every year [REF]. 

An article from the World Health Organization calls safe, legal abortion a "fundamental right of women, irrespective of where they live" and unsafe abortion a "silent pandemic" [REF]. The article states "ending the silent pandemic of unsafe abortion is an urgent public-health and human-rights imperative." It also states "access to safe abortion improves women’s health, and vice versa, as documented in Romania during the regime of President Nicolae Ceaușescu" and "legalisation of abortion on request is a necessary but insufficient step toward improving women’s health" citing that in some countries, such as India where abortion has been legal for decades, access to competent care remains restricted because of other barriers. WHO’s Global Strategy on Reproductive Health, adopted by the World Health Assembly in May 2004, noted: “As a preventable cause of maternal mortality and morbidity, unsafe abortion must be dealt with as part of the MDG on improving maternal health and other international development goals and targets." [REF] The WHO's Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP), whose research concerns people's sexual and reproductive health and lives,[REF] has an overall strategy to combat unsafe abortion that comprises four inter-related activities [REF]:

to collate, synthesize and generate scientifically sound evidence on unsafe abortion prevalence and practices;
to develop improved technologies and implement interventions to make abortion safer;
to translate evidence into norms, tools and guidelines;
and to assist in the development of programmes and policies that reduce unsafe abortion and improve access to safe abortion and highquality postabortion care . 

When negotiating the Cairo Programme of Action at the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), the issue was so contentious that delegates eventually decided to omit any recommendation to legalize abortion, instead advising governments to provide proper post-abortion care and to invest in programs that will decrease the number of unwanted pregnancies [REF]. 

On April 18, 2008 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, a group comprising members from 47 European countries, adopted a resolution calling for the decriminalization of abortion within reasonable gestational limits and guaranteed access to safe abortion procedures. The nonbinding resolution was passed on April 16 by a vote of 102 to 69 [REF]. 

During and after the ICPD, some interested parties attempted to interpret the term ‘reproductive health’ in the sense that it implies abortion as a means of family planning or, indeed, a right to abortion. These interpretations, however, do not reflect the consensus reached at the Conference. 
For the European Union, where legislation on abortion is certainly less restrictive than elsewhere, the Council Presidency has clearly stated that the Council’s commitment to promote ‘reproductive health’ did not include the promotion of abortion [REF]. Likewise, the European Commission, in response to a question from a Member of the European Parliament, clarified: . 

“The term ‘reproductive health’ was defined by the United Nations (UN) in 1994 at the Cairo International Conference on Population and Development. All Member States of the Union endorsed the Programme of Action adopted at Cairo. The Union has never adopted an alternative definition of ‘reproductive health’ to that given in the Programme of Action, which makes no reference to abortion.”[REF] . 

With regard to the US, it should be noted that, only a few days prior to the Cairo Conference, the head of the US delegation, Vice President Al Gore, had stated for the record: . 

“Let us get a false issue off the table: the US does not seek to establish a new international right to abortion, and we do not believe that abortion should be encouraged as a method of family planning.”[REF] . 

Some years later, the position of the US Administration in this debate was reconfirmed by US Ambassador to the UN, Ellen Sauerbrey, when she stated at a meeting of the UN Commission on the Status of Women that: “nongovernmental organizations are attempting to assert that Beijing in some way creates or contributes to the creation of an internationally recognized fundamental right to abortion” [REF]. She added: “There is no fundamental right to abortion. And yet it keeps coming up largely driven by NGOs trying to hijack the term and trying to make it into a definition” [REF]. 

Collaborative research from the Institute of Development Studies states that "access to safe abortion is a matter of human rights, democracy and public health, and the denial of such access is a major cause of death and impairment, with significant costs to [international] development" [REF]. The research highlights the inequities of access to safe abortion both globally and nationally and emphasises the importance of global and national movements for reform to address this. The shift by campaigners of reproductive rights from an issue-based agenda (the right to abortion), to safe, legal abortion not only as a human right, but bound up with democratic and citizenship rights, has been an important way of reframing the abortion debate and reproductive justice agenda [REF]. 

Meanwhile, however the European Court of Human Rights settled the question through a landmark judgment (Case of A. B. and C. v. Ireland), in which it is stated that the European Convention on Human Rights does not contain a right to abortion.

Compulsory or forced sterilizations and abortions may also occur in the context of population control policies. 
From the 1970s to 1980s, tension grew between women's health activists who advance women's reproductive rights as part of a human rights-based approach on the one hand, and population control advocates on the other [REF]. At the 1984 UN World Population Conference in Mexico City population control policies came under attack from women's health advocates who argued that the policies' narrow focus led to coercion and decreased quality of care, and that these policies ignored the varied social and cultural contexts in which family planning was provided in developing countries. In the 1980s the HIV/AIDS epidemic forced a broader discussion of sex into the public discourse in many countries, leading to more emphasis on reproductive health issues beyond reducing fertility. The growing opposition to the narrow population control focus led to a significant departure in the early 1990s from past population control policies [REF]. In the United States, abortion opponents have recently begun to accuse reproductive rights advocates of advancing a racist agenda of eugenics, and of trying to reduce the African American population of the U.S [REF].

Laws in many countries and states require sperm donors to be either anonymous or known to the recipient, or the laws restrict the number of children each donor may father. Although many donors choose to remain anonymous, new technologies such as the Internet and DNA technology have opened up new avenues for those wishing to know more about the biological father, siblings and half-siblings.

Opponents of legalized abortion view the term "reproductive rights" as a euphemism to sway emotions in favor of abortion. National Right to Life has referred to "reproductive rights" as a "fudge term" and "the code word for abortion rights."[REF] .Sex selection is the attempt to control the sex of the offspring to achieve a desired sex. It can be accomplished in several ways, both pre- and post-implantation of an embryo, as well as at birth. It has been marketed under the title family balancing.

In many cultures, male offspring are desired in order to inherit property, carry on family name, to provide support for parents in old age. 

A 2009 study at the University of Ulster found that having sisters, as compared to brothers, can enhance the quality of life of an adult [REF]. 

Evidence suggests couples in the United Kingdom tend to pick sons and daughters in roughly even numbers [REF].

Two major types of pre-implantation methods can be used for social sex selection. Both of them are based on actively rendering the second sex chromosome to be either an Y chromosome (resulting in a male), or an X chromosome (resulting in a female) [REF].

The Ericsson method, first applied in a clinical setting in the 1970s by Dr. Ronald J. Ericsson, uses higher concentrations of sperm of the desired sex to increase the likelihood of conceiving that gender. The method has a 70-72% success rate for boys and a 69-75% success rate for girls [REF]. Currently, approximately 50 gender selection centers in the United States use the Ericsson Method for artificial gender selection [REF]. 

The Ericsson method separates male and female sperm by passing them through a column filled with blood protein, human serum albumin. As the sperm enter the human serum albumin, the differences in mass between the X and Y chromosomes manifest as the lighter male sperm push deeper into the protein than the females dragged down by the weight of the extra “leg” of the X sex chromosome [REF]. This tiny difference creates separate layers of concentrated male and female sperm. The layers of gender-selected sperm are of higher concentrations but not pure. This lack of purity explains the 30% chance of gender selection failure of the Ericsson method [REF].

After ovarian stimulation, multiple eggs are removed from the mother. The eggs are fertilized in the laboratory using the father's sperm in a technique called in vitro fertilization (IVF). "In vitro” is Latin for "within glass". Fertilized eggs are called embryos. As the embryos develop through mitosis, they are separated by sex. Embryos of the desired gender are implanted back in the mother's uterus. 

Prior to fertilization with IVF, the fertilized eggs can be genetically biopsied with preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) to increase fertilization success [REF]. Once an embryo grows to a 6-8 cell size, a small laser incision in the egg membrane (zona pellucida) allows safe removal of one of the cells [REF]. Every cell in the embryo contains an identical copy of the genome of the entire person. Removal of one of these cells does not harm the developing embryo [REF]. An embryologist then studies the chromosomes in the extracted cells for genetic defects and for a definite analysis of the embryo’s gender [REF]. Embryos of the desired sex and with acceptable genetics are then placed back into the mother. 
The IVF/PGD technique is favored over the Ericsson method because of the stricter control of the offspring gender in the laboratory. Since only embryos of the desired sex are transferred to the mother, IVF/PGD avoids the small likelihood present in the Ericsson method of an undesired sperm fertilizing the egg. Gender selection success rates for IVF/PGD are very high. The technique is recommended for couples who will not accept a child of the undesired gender [REF].

Timing methods aim to affect the sex ratio of the resultant children by having sexual intercourse at specific times as related to ovulation, but have shown no influence on the sex of the baby [REF]. 

The Shettles method, first formally theorized in the 1960s by Landrum B. Shettles, proposes that sperm containing the X (female) chromosome are more resilient than sperm containing the Y (male) chromosome. The method advocates intercourse two to four days prior to ovulation. By the time ovulation occurs, the cervix should contain a higher concentration of female sperm still capable of fertilization (with most of the male sperm already dead). Intercourse close to ovulation, on the other hand, should increase the chances of conceiving a boy since the concentration of Y sperm is be higher at the height of the menstrual cycle [REF].
The Whelan method is an "intercourse timing" method that advocates the opposite of the Shettles method. The Whelan method suggests intercourse four to six days prior to ovulation to increase likelihood of fertilization by male sperm [REF].

Sperm sorting is an advanced technique that sorts sperm "in vitro" by flow cytometry. This shines a laser at the sperm to distinguish X and Y chromosomes, and can automatically separate the sperm out into different samples. The technology is already in commercial use for animal farming [REF]. It is currently being trialed on humans in the US under the trademark MicroSort; it claims a 90% success rate but is still considered experimental by the FDA [REF].

Sex selection after implantation can be performed by prenatal sex discernment, followed by sex-selective abortion of any offspring of the unwanted sex. For prenatal sex discernment, a blood test can be taken from the mother for testing of small amounts of fetal DNA within it, and has been estimated to be reliable more than 98% of the time, as long as the samples are taken after the seventh week of pregnancy [REF].

Sex-selective infanticide - Killing children of the unwanted sex. Though illegal in most parts of the world, it is still practiced. 

Sex-selective child abandonment - Abandoning children of the unwanted sex. Though illegal in most parts of the world, it is still practiced. 

Sex-selective adoption - Placing children of the unwanted sex up for adoption. Less commonly viewed as a method of social sex selection, adoption affords families that have a gender preference a legal means of choosing offspring of a particular sex.

The application of these techniques to humans creates moral and ethical concerns in the opinion of some, while the advantages of sensible use of selected technologies is favored by others. 

In contrast, in an interview study, sex-selection technology providers generally argued that sex selection is an expression of reproductive rights, was initiated and pursued by women, and was a sign of female empowerment that allowed couples to make well-informed family planning decisions, prevented occurrences of unintended pregnancy and abortion, and minimized intimate partner violence and/or child neglect [REF]. In contrast, primary care physicians questioned whether women could truly express free choice under pressure from family and community [REF]. In addition, primary care physicians voiced the concerns that sex selection led to invasive medical interventions in the absence of therapeutic indications, contributed to gender stereotypes that could result in child neglect of the lesser-desired sex, and was not a solution to domestic violence [REF]. 

Post-conceptual selection by preimplantation testing (PGD) also involves preferential use of embryos, and termination of pregnancy for gender selection also raises many ethical questions of the abortion debate.

In addition to the ethical concerns mentioned, issues of demographics arise in societies where social sex selection is common. A society may exhibit a widespread bias towards having children of a specific gender, either due to cultural biases or economic concerns (e.g. male children may be more employable in the future and thus provide more financial support). When combined with frequent social sex selection, this bias may produce a gender imbalance that has undesirable consequences. This phenomenon has been observed in many nations in the Far East, such as India and China, where social sex selection has produced unnaturally high male/female ratios in the population. China's gender imbalance is further increased by the One Child Policy, although applicable only in most urban populations. In these nations, a lack of opportunity for many men to marry is believed to be producing increases in crime, demand for prostitution, mass emigration, and the selling of brides [REF]. 

Major demographic changes have occurred in China because of sex selection. Chinese government reports show that the sex ratio for newborns is 118:100 (boys:girls), higher in rural areas such as Guangdong and Hainan (130:100) compared to the average of 104:100 in developed countries. It is believed that the ratio would increase further to the point that, by 2020, men of marriageable age would be unable to find mates, resulting in large social problems [REF]. 

Some nations, such as India, have attempted to curtail these gender imbalances with criminal statutes [REF]. In contrast, bioethicist Jacob Appel of New York University has argued that governments should pay couples to choose to have female children [REF]. According to Professor Appel, "if female babies [were] worth their weight in rupees and yuan, economic and educational opportunities for girls would soon follow."[REF] . 

In contrast, actual experience in Western cultures provides no evidence for any degree of gender imbalance from technologies which have long been available and legal - such as selective abortion or preimplantation embryo testing. When used for family balancing indications in such countries as the United States, pre-conceptual sex selection is widely sought without any preferential selection of males. Thus the right of individual families to determine whether or not to balance gender of offspring in their families is not and will not become, in many countries, a demographic issue. Furthermore, in countries where such demographic issues exist because of strong gender preferences in a segment of the population, regulatory and legal control of, without denial of access to, sperm sorting technology can be utilized to provide individuals with choices while ensuring that equal numbers of boys and girls are produced for population demographic equality. 

Although problems such as rising crime rates may be associated with high male-female ratios (more males than females), it is not clear that such problems would arise in connection with low male-female ratios (fewer males than females). In addition, cultural practices such as polyamory and polyandry may reduce or eliminate potential problems. Also incentives for emigration of young singles out of gender imbalanced nations into more gender balanced nations, has often been seen as another solution to reduce potential social problems [REF].

There are a wide variety of social sex selections methods which have not been demonstrated to be effective. Because even implausible and ineffective methods have a "success" rate of 50%, many continued to be recommended by word of mouth. 

As early as 330 BC, Aristotle prescribed the ligation (tying off) of the left testicle in men wishing to have boys [REF]. 

Some people believe that timing conception according to astrological charts can influence a baby's sex,[REF] though there is no evidence to support this or any other timing method. A 13th century Chinese conception chart purports to be able to identify the sex of the baby before birth. 

Sperm sorting utilizes the technique of flow cytometry to analyze and 'sort' spermatozoa. During the early to mid 1980s, Dr. Glenn Spaulding was the first to sort viable whole human and animal spermatozoa using a flow cytometer, and utilized the sorted motile rabbit sperm for artificial insemination. Subsequently, the first patent application disclosing the method to sort "two viable subpopulations enriched for x- or y- sperm"[REF] was filed in April 1987 as US Application Serial Number 35,986 and later became part of US Patent 5,021,244; and the patent included the discovery of haploid expression (sex-associated membrane proteins, or SAM proteins) and the development of monoclonal antibodies to those proteins. Additional applications and methods were added, including antibodies, from 1987 through 1997 [REF]. At the time of the patent filing, both Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories and the USDA were only sorting fixed sperm nuclei,[REF] after the Application Serial Number 35,986 patent filing a new technique was utilized by the USDA where "sperm were briefly sonicated to remove tails" [REF]. USDA in conjunction with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, 'Beltsfield Sperm Sexing Technology' relies on the DNA difference between the X- and Y- chromosomes [REF]. Prior to flow cytometric sorting, semen is labeled with a fluorescent dye called Hoechst 33342 which binds to the DNA of each spermatozoon. As the X chromosome is larger (i.e. has more DNA) than the Y chromosome, the "female" (X-chromosome bearing) spermatozoa will absorb a greater amount of dye than its male (Y-chromosome bearing) counterpart. As a consequence, when exposed to UV light during flow cytometry, X spermatozoa fluoresce brighter than Y- spermatozoa. As the spermatozoa pass through the flow cytometer in single file, each spermatozoon is encased by a single droplet of fluid and assigned an electric charge corresponding to its chromosome status (e.g. X-positive charge, Y-negative charge). The stream of X- and Y- droplets is then separated by means of electrostatic deflection and collected into separate collection tubes for subsequent processing [REF]. 

Recently, a study published in 2006 indicated that mothers with toxoplasmosis have a significantly higher sex ratio of boys to girls. This has been discussed in connection with the manipulation hypothesis of parasites [REF].
Another study found a link between sex and the diet of the mother, but this may be due to statistical chance, and has yet to be confirmed [REF].

Sex selection is officially prohibited in China, but the Chinese government admits that the practice is widespread, especially in rural areas of China and among lawless groups such as ghettoized migrant workers in cities (despite denials by the government-sponsored studies) [REF]. 

Social sex selection is illegal in India. To ensure this, prenatal determination of sex through ultrasound is also illegal in India. These laws are instituted to combat the prevalent practice of sex-selective abortion. However, these laws have generally failed to be effective in rural areas and, despite education efforts, sex-selective abortion continues to be widely practiced there. 

Sex selection is legal in most of the world, and it is practiced particularly in Western countries, but is more limited in Eastern countries, such as India or China. There is fertility tourism from the United Kingdom to the United States for sex selection, because preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD, a potential expansion of IVF), which can be used for sex selection, is prohibited in the UK, except when it is used to screen for genetic diseases, while the laws in the US are more relaxed in this subject [REF].Urbanization in the People's Republic of China increased in speed following the initiation of the reform and opening policy. By the end of 2011, the mainland of the People's Republic of China had a total urban population of 691 million or 51.3% of the total population, rising from 26% in 1990 [REF]. 

In the long term, China faces increasing urbanization; according to predictions, nearly 70% of the population will live in urban areas by 2035. Over the next two decades China will build 20,000 to 50,000 new skyscrapers and more than 170 cities will require mass transit systems by 2025.

China's increase in urbanization was a function of the surpluses produced from the agricultural sector. This judgment is based on (1) the fact that not until the end of the Qing Period did China begin importing moderate quantities of foodstuffs from the outside world to help feed its population; and (2) the fact that the handicraft sector never challenged agricultural dominance in the economy despite a symbiotic relationship between them. 

By the same token, urbanization rarely exceeded ten percent of the total population although large urban centers were established. For example, during the Song, the northern capital Kaifeng (of the Northern Song) and southern capital Hangzhou (of the Southern Song) had 1.4 million and one million inhabitants, respectively [REF]. In addition, it was common that urban residents also had one foot in the rural sector due to private landholding property rights.

Urban population grew steadily at around 3%-4% from 1950 to 1965. Urban population experienced a 'great jump' in 1958-1961 during the "Great Leap Forward" in conjunction with the massive industrialization effort. During the Cultural Revolution years of 1965-1975, urban population growth dropped as a result of 'rustication'. From 1962 to 1978, it is estimated that almost 18 million urban youth moved to the countryside [REF]. 

However, after reforms were launched at the end of 1978, urban population growth began to accelerate. The inflow of foreign direct investment created massive employment opportunities, which fostered urban population growth. In the 1990s, urban population growth started to slow. This reflected a slower increase in employment growth following the restructuring of the state-owned enterprises (SOE). 

The majority of China's people live in the eastern segment of the country, the traditional China proper. Most are peasants living, as did their forebears, in the low-lying hills and central plains that stretch from the highlands eastward and southward to the sea. Agriculture predominates in this vast area, generally favored by a temperate or subtropical climate. The meticulously tilled fields are evidence in part of the government's continuing concern over farm output and the food supply. 

Although migration to urban areas has been restricted since the late 1950s, as of the end of 1985 about 33 percent of the population was urban. An urban and industrial corridor formed a broad arc stretching from Harbin in the northeast through the Beijing area and south to China's largest city, the industrial metropolitan complex of Shanghai. 

The uneven pattern of internal development and settlement, so strongly weighted toward the eastern part of the country, doubtless will change relatively little even with developing interest in exploiting the mineral-rich and agriculturally productive portions of the vast northwest and southwest regions. The adverse terrain and climate of most of those regions have historically discouraged dense population. 

In 1987 China had a total of twenty-nine provincial-level administrative units directly under the central government in Beijing. In addition to the twenty-one provinces (sheng), there were five autonomous regions (zizhiqu) for minority nationalities, and three special municipalities (shi)--the three largest cities, Shanghai, Beijing, and Tianjin. (The establishment of Hainan Island as a provincial-level unit separate from Guangdong Province was scheduled in 1988.) A 1979 change in provincial-level administrative boundaries in the northeast region restored Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region to its original size (it had been reduced by a third in 1969) at the expense of Heilongjiang, Jilin, and Liaoning provinces. Urban areas were further subdivided into lower-level administrative units beginning with municipalities and extending down to the neighborhood level. 

The pace of urbanization in China from 1949 to 1982 was relatively slow because of both rapid growth of the rural population and tight restrictions on rural-urban migration for most of that period. According to the 1953 and 1982 censuses, the urban population as a percentage of total population increased from 13.3 to 20.6 percent during that period. From 1982 to 1986, however, the urban population increased dramatically to 37 percent of the total population. This large jump resulted from a combination of factors. One was the migration of large numbers of surplus agricultural workers, displaced by the agricultural responsibility system, from rural to urban areas. Another was a 1984 decision to broaden the criteria for classifying an area as a city or town. During 1984 the number of towns meeting the new urban criteria increased more than twofold, and the urban town population doubled. In the mid-1980s demographers expected the proportion of the population living in cities and towns to be around 50 percent by the turn of the century. This urban growth was expected to result primarily from the increase in the number of small- and medium-sized cities and towns rather than from an expansion of existing large cities. 

China's statistics regarding urban population sometimes can be misleading because of the various criteria used to calculate urban population. In the 1953 census, urban essentially referred to settlements with populations of more than 2,500, in which more than 50 percent of the labor force were involved in nonagricultural pursuits. The 1964 census raised the cut-off to 3,000 and the requirement for nonagricultural labor to 70 percent. The 1982 census used the 3,000/70 percent minimum but introduced criteria of 2,500 to 3,000 and 85 percent as well. Also, in calculating urban population, the 1982 census made a radical change by including the agricultural population residing within the city boundaries. This explains the dramatic jump in urban population from the 138.7 million reported for year-end 1981 to the 206.6 million counted by the 1982 census. In 1984 the urban guidelines were further loosened, allowing for lower minimum population totals and nonagricultural percentages. The criteria varied among provincial-level units. 

Although country urban population—382 million, or 37 percent of the total population in the mid-1980s—was relatively low by comparison with developed nations, the number of people living in urban areas in China was greater than the total population of any country in the world except India. The four Chinese cities with the largest populations in 1985 were Shanghai, with 7 million; Beijing, with 5.9 million; Tianjin, with 5.4 million; and Shenyang, with 4.2 million. The disproportionate distribution of population in large cities occurred as a result of the government's emphasis after 1949 on the development of large cities over smaller urban areas. In 1985 the 22 most populous cities in China had a total population of 47.5 million, or about 12 percent of China's total urban population. The number of cities with populations of at least 100,000 increased from 200 in 1976 to 342 in 1986. 

In 1987 China was committed to a three-part strategy to control urban growth: strictly limiting the size of big cities (those of 500,000 or more people); developing medium-sized cities (200,000 to 500,000); and encouraging the growth of small cities (100,000 to 200,000). The government also encouraged the development of small market and commune centers that were not then officially designated as urban places, hoping that they eventually would be transformed into towns and small cities. The big and medium-sized cities were viewed as centers of heavy and light industry, and small cities and towns were looked on as possible locations for handicraft and workshop activities, using labor provided mainly from rural overflow. 

In 2005, China had 286 cities. Most of China's cities have a population of one million and below. Shanghai is the largest city in China, with a population of 19 million, followed by Beijing with a population of 17.4 million. These are the two mega-cities in China. 

From 2010 to 2025, it is estimated by the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development that 300 million Chinese now living in rural areas will move into cities. The fast pace of urbanization will create at least 1 trillion yuan in annual investment opportunities in building water supply, waste treatment, heating and other public utilities in the cities [REF].

- bgcolor="#efefef" 
Urban population growth (%) 
Region/country 1985-1990 1990-1995 1995-2000 2000-2005
. |- Asia 3.78 3.09 2.88 2.61
. |- South-East Asia 4.11 3.99 3.84 3.40
. |- East Asia 4.08 3.08 2.82 2.52
. |- China 5.04 3.77 3.52 3.08 
. |- Europe 0.78 0.37 0.14 0.13
. |- North America 1.24 0.57 1.51 1.37
. |- Oceania 1.52 1.52 1.46 1.40
. |- World 2.70 2.33 2.18 2.04 . 

According to Professor Lu Dadao, president of the Geographical Society of China (GSC), China's urbanization took 22 years to increase to 39.1% from 17.9%. It took Britain 120 years, the US, 80 years, and Japan more than 30 years to accomplish this. 

As shown in the table (right), China's urban population growth is higher than that of Asia as well as the world. 

China's urbanization rate in 2005 was higher than that of Asia and roughly on par with the levels in East and South-East Asia. However, the country still has a long way to go in catching up with the western developed countries.